IV
THE ENGLISH REFORM BILL
[283] THE prime object of the Reform Bill now [ 1831] lying before
the English Parliament is to bring justice and fairness into the
allotment of the parts played by the different classes and divisions
of the people in the election of members of Parliament, and to do
this by substituting a greater symmetry for the most bizarre and
haphazard anomalies and inequalities which prevail at present.
There are numbers, localities, private interests, which are to be
ordered differently; nevertheless, it is on the nobility, the very
heart and vital principle of the constitution and condition of Great
Britain, that this alteration presses in fact. This is the aspect of the
present Bill which deserves special notice. And the aim of this
essay is to assemble here these higher aspects of the matter which
have been discussed in the parliamentary debates up till now. The
fact that in the House of Commons the Bill encountered opposition
from so many members, and that the second reading was carried
by the chance of one vote, cannot cause surprise, because it is just
the powerful aristocratic interests in the Lower House that are to
be attacked and reformed. If the Bill were opposed by all those
who themselves or whose constituents -are to lose their former
prerogative and influence, there would at once be a most decided
majority against the Bill. The promoters of the Bill could rely only
on this, that now a sense of justice had mastered the obstinacy of
privilege in those whose advantage lay in those prerogatives-a
sense that acquired great strength from · the anxious impression
[284] produce9 on interested Members of Parliament by the neigh­
bouring example of France. [Moreover] the almost universal
opinion in England about the need of reform always tended to
make itself felt as a motive of the first importance in Parliament.
But even if public opinion in Great Britain were almost always for
reform to the extent, or within the limits, proposed in the Bill, we
would still have to be allowed. to examine the substance of what
this opinion desires, all the more so because in recent times we have
not infrequently experienced that its demands have proved to be

The English Reform Bill
impracticable, or, if practicable, pernicious, and that public opinion
has now turned just as vigorously against what immediately before
it had vigorously demanded and appeared to welcome. The ancients
who had belonged to democracies from their youth onwards, and
who had lived through a long series of experiences in them and
applied their thoughtful reflection to these, had different views
about popular opinion from those that are now current on more
or less a priori grounds.
(285] (1. THE NECESSITY OF A REFORM OF THE FRANCHISE]
The proposed reform starts from the undisputed fact that the
bases on which was determined the share held by the different
counties and boroughs in England in parliamentary seats had been
completely altered in the course of time, [and] that therefore the
'rights to this share' had become completely at variance with the
principles of these bases and contradictory to everything that in
this part of a constitution appears to the simplest common sense
as obviously right and fair. One of the most important opponent s
of the Bill, Robert Peel, grants 1 that it may seem easy to expatiate
on the anomalies and absurdity of the English constitution; and its
follies are expounded at length in all their details in the parlia­
mentary debates and in the newspapers. Therefore it may suffice
here to recall the chief points, namely that the right of electing to
seats in Parliament has been retained by thinly populated towns
or even by their councillors (who co-opt their colleagues) alone
without their fellow citizens, and thus by places reduced to only
two or three residents (and leaseholders at that), while many cities
that have prospered and flourished in recent years and have xoo,ooo
inhabitants or more have no right of election; and between these
extremes there is still the greatest variety of other inequalitie s.
The first result is that the election to a large number of parlia­
mentary seats is in the hands of a small number of individuals . It
is calculated that a majorjty of the House is at the disposal of
1 so peers. Secondly, a still more significant number of seats is
purchasable-some of them [ 286] a recognized marketable com­
modity so that the possession of one of these seats is acquired by
bribery or the formal payment of a specific sum to the electors or
in general is reduced in numerous other ways to a matter of cash.
1 The reference is probably to Peel's speech of 3 March 1831 (Sp eeches,
vol. ii, p. z8o).

The English Reform Bill 297
It will be difficult to point anywhere to a similar symptom of
a people's political corruption. Montesquieu 1 pronounced virtue,
the unselfish sense of duty to the state, to be the principle of the
democratic constitution. In the English constitution the demo­
cratic element has an important sphere in the people's participa­
tion in the election of members of the Lower House, of the
politicians who have the most decisive role in settling public
affairs. Of course it is the almost unanimous view of the pragmatic
historians 2 that if in any nation private interest and a dirty monetary
advan age becomes the preponderating ingredient in the election
of Ministers of state, then the situation is to be regarded as the
forerunner of the inevitable loss of that nation's political freedom,
the ruin of its constitution and even of the state. To counter the
Englishman's pride in his freedom, we Germans may well cite the
fact that even if the old constitution of the German Empire had
likewise become a formless aggregate3 of particular rights, it was
only the external bond of the German states, and political life
within these, so far as concerned elections to their Diets4 and the
corresponding franchise, was free from the absurdity of the Eng­
lish system, and no less free from the [political] corruption that
permeates every class of the English people. Now even if alongside
the democratic element in England the aristocratic is an extremely
important power; even if purely aristocratic governments like
Venice, Genoa, Berne, &c., are reproached with finding their
security and strength by submerging their subjects in universal
sensualit y and moral corruption; and even if it be reckoned as
freedom to cast one's vote entirely on caprice, which motive is
supposed to determine the will; [ 287] still it must be recognized
as a good sign of the reawakening of a moral temper in the English
people that one of the feelings which the need of a reform brings
with it is an antipathy to the [political] depravity [to which I have
referred]. Equally, however, we can see that the right way to
pursue improvement is not by the moral route of using ideas,
admonitions, associations of isolated individuals, in order to
counteract the system of corruption and avoid being indebted to
it, but by the alteration of institutions. The common prejudice of
1 Esprit des Lois, vol. iii, p. 3, and Hegel, Ph.d.R. , § 273.
2 See Hegel , Ph.d.R., § 3, and note 15 thereto in Eng. tr. (Oxford, 1942).
3 See above, The German Constitution, e.g. [9-10].
4 Readin g Landstiinden with Boumann .

The English Reform Bill
inertia, namely to cling always to the old faith in the excellence of
an institution, even if the present state of affairs derived from it is
altogether corrupt, has thus at last caved in. A more thorough ­
going reform is all the more required in that, at the opening of
every new Parliament, the opportunity presented by bribery peti­
tions has given rise to proposals for improving [the system], but
they have remained without any significant success. For example,
the recent and most proper proposal to take away the franchis e
from one place where bribery has been proved and to transfer it
to the city of Birmingham, and thereby to display an equitable
inclination to redress the most striking inequality with extreme
moderation, was manceuvred off the field by the parliamenta ry
tactics of Ministers, especially of Peel, the Minister otherwise
praised for his liberal views. 1 A great step forward at the opening
session of the present Parliament has thus been reduced to for­
bidding candidates to distribute any more badges to electors
favourably disposed to them. Since the great majority of members
of both Houses, who are the judges in bribery cases, z are involved
in the system of corruption, while the majority of members of the
Lower House owe their seats to this system, charges of bribery
against an enfranchised place, and their investigation and trial,
have been exposed as downright farces and even as shameless
procedures, too publicly and too loudly for anything to be expected
along that route now except redress in isolated instances.
[ 288] The other usual ground taken in Parliament against attacks
on positive rights is the [appeal to the] wisdom of our ancestors,
but this appeal cannot be upheld in this matter. This wisdom is
to be ascribed to the distribution of the parliamentary franchi se
according to the then existing population of counties, cities, and
boroughs, or according to their importance in other respects; and
there is far too sharp a contrast between that and what has come
to be the modern population, wealth, and importance of district s
and interests. Another point not broached in discussion is the loss
of capital which so many individuals [would] suffer and the loss of
income of a still greater number; the monetary gain derived from
direct bribery is illegal, though all classes are interested in it either
1 This is not quite fair to Peel. This involved matter, i.e. proposals to trans fer
Penryn to Manchester and East Retford to Birmin gham, is discussed inN. Gash,
Mr. Secretary Peel (London, 1961), pp. 470-1 et al.
2 Hegel is wrong here. The House of Lord s had no jurisdict ion in electoral
cases, which were tried solely by a committee of the Commons.

The English Reform Bill 299
as bribers or bribed. The capital value lost to the boroughs which
are to be deprived of their franchise is based on the fact that, in
the course of time, a political right has been transformed into
a pecuniary asset. Although the acquisition [of a seat], at a price
which is now getting lower, has happened just as bona fide as the
purchase of slaves, and although under new laws what the English
Parliament considers carefully in such a case is the maintenance
of real property, and, in the event of a loss occurring, compensation
accordingly, no claims of this sort have been made in the present
discus ~ions, nor has any difficulty been raised on this score. 1 But
this circumstance may be an effective motive against the Bill for
a number of Members of Parliament.
On the other hand another legal principle especially charac­
teristic of England is indeed attacked by the Bill. This is the
character of 'positivity' which preponderates in the institutions of
English law, public and private alike. It is true that every right and
its corresponding law is in form something positive, ordained, and
instituted by the supreme power in the state, something to which
obedience must be given just because it is a statute. But at no time
more than the present has the general intelligence been led to
distinguish between whether rights are purely positive in their
material content or whether they are also inherently right and
rational. In no constitution is judgement so strongly induced [ 289]
to attend to this distinction as in the English, now that the con­
tinental nations have allowed themselves to be imposed on for so
long by declamations about English · freedom and by England's
pride in her system of law. It is well known that the latter rests
entirely on particular rights, freedoms, privileges conferred, sold,
, presented by or extorted from kings and Parliament on special
occasions. Magna Charta aD:_d the Bill of Rights, which concern
the most important foundations of the English constitution and
which have received further definition in subsequent parliamentary
legislation, are concessions wrung [from the Crown] by force, or
else acts of grace, agreements, &c., and constitutional rights have
stuck by the form of private rights , which they had at their origin,
and therefore by the accident of their content. This inherently
' While English legislation normally provided for compensation when it
encroached on private property, the Reform Bill did not propose any com­
pensation to the owners or other interested parties in boroughs selected for
disfranchisement. Hence parliamentary representation was in fact not regarded
in England as a species of private property.

JOO The English Reform Bill
disconnected aggregate of positive provisions has not yet under­
gone the development and recasting which has been carried out
in the civilized states of the Continent, and which the Germa n
provinces, for example, have enjoyed for a longer or shorter
period.
Hitherto England has lacked the features which constitute the
major part of these glorious and fortunate advances. Amongst these
features the chief is the scientific remodelling of law, whereby, on
the one hand, general principles have been applied to and carried
through the particular specifications [of law] and their complexitie s,
while on the other hand concrete and special cases have been
reduced to simpler provisions. This remodelling has made it pos­
sible for the newer continental states to produce statute books ao.d
political institutions framed preponderantly on general principle s,
·a process in which, so far as concerns the contents of justic e,
common sense and sound reasoning have been allowed their prop er
share. Next, a still more important feature in the transformatio n
of law must be mentioned-the deep insight of princes in making
the guiding stars of their legislative activity, with which the
monarch's due power is linked, such principles as the state's well­
being, the happiness of their subjects , and the general welfare, as
well as and above all the sense of an absolute justice, and in doing
this with a view to making way for these principles and giving
them reality in face of merely positive privileges, traditional private
interest, and the stupidity of the masses. [ 290] The reason why
England is so remarkably far behind the other civilized states of
Europe in institutions derived from true rights is simply that there
the governing power lies in the hands of those possessed of so
many privileges which contradict a rational constitutional law and
true legislation.
This is the situation on which the projected reform is meant to
have an important effect. Not, however, that it has been intend ed
to produce this effect by enlarging the power of the monarchi cal
element in the constitution; on the contrar y, if the Bill is not to
meet with universal disapproval immediately, jealousy of the power
of the throne, that most stubborn of English prejudices, must
remain untouched, and the proposed measure owes part of its
popularity instead to the fact that by it the Crown's influence is
seen to be further weakened. What rouses the greatest interest is the
fear in some quarters, the hope in others , that the reform of the

The English Reform Bill
franchise will bring in its train other reforms of substance. The
English principle of 'positivity' on which, as I have said, the whole
of English law rests, does through the Bill actually suffer a shock
which in England is entirely new and unheard of, and one instinc­
tively suspects that more far-reaching changes will issue from this
subversion of the formal basis of the existing order.
[2. INSTANCES OF ABUSES TO BE REMOVED]
Some expressions of these points of view have occurred in the
course • of parliamentary debates, though rather cursorily. The
prom oters and friends of the Bill may really believe that it will
not lead on to anything beyond the point it reaches itself or, in
order not to irritate the opposition more seriously, they may not
let their hopes become more vocal, just as the opposition too may
not represent their real concern as a prize of victory; because they
own much, they have, of course, much to lose. But the fact that no
more is said in Parliament about this more materialistic aspect of
reform [291] is due in great part to the convention that , when
important matters are before this assembly, the bulk of the time is
taken up by members' explanations oftheir personal position; they
give their opinions not as business men but as privileged persons
and as orators. In England a broad field for reform is open, com­
prising the most important aims of civil and political society. The
necessity for reform begins to be felt. Something of what has been
indicat ed [above] on this subject may serve as an example of the
amount of work which is over and done with elsewhere and which
still waits to be done in England.
Amongst the expectations of material impro vements there is
above all the hope for economies in adminis tration. But however
often this theme is starte d by the opposition as something ab­
solutely necessary for easing the pressure [of taxation] and the
general misery of the people, every time the statement is repeated
that all efforts to this end have hitherto gone for nothing, and that
the hope held out to the people by Ministers, and even in the
speech from the throne, has every time been deceived. These
declamations have been repeated in similar words every time taxes
have been reduced in the last fifteen years. For finally fulfilling the
people's hopes better prospects are held out in a reformed Parlia­
ment, i.e. in the greater independence of a grea~er number of

302 The English Reform Bill
members on the Ministry, whose weakness and whose hard­
heartedness to the people and its interests, &c., has been blamed
for a continuing extravagant expenditure. But if we bring under
consideration the chief heads of public expenditure in England, it
appears that there is no great room for economy: first, interest pay­
ments on the enormous national debt cannot be reduced; secondly,
the cost of the army and navy, pensions included, is most closely
connected not only with the political situation, and especially with
the interest of trade, the basis of England's existence, and the
danger of internal revolts, but also with the habits of military and
naval men and their demand not to fall behind other classes in
good living and luxury; and thus in this field there can be no cuts
without risk. The calculations made public as a result of the outcr y
against the so notorious sinecures [ 292] have shown that even their
total abolition, not to be effected without great injustice, would be
nothing to speak of. But there is no need to expatiate on these
material matters but only to notice that the indefatigable pains that
Hume 1 took to examine the finances down to the last detail have
gone all along without result. This cannot be ascribed solely to the
corruption of the parliamentary aristocracy and the Ministry's
obsequiousness to it, needing its help as it did-that aristocracy
which procures for itself and its relatives all sorts of gains through
sinecures, and, in general, through lucrative posts in the administra ­
tion, the army, the Church, and the court. The relatively very small
number of votes which proposals for reducing expenditure usually
gain points to a slender hope in the possibility of, or to a faint
interest in, such lightening of the so-called general pressure [of
taxation] against which Members of Parliament are of course pro­
tected by their wealth. That fraction of them which counts as
independent tends to be on the side of the Ministry, and this
independence sometimes shows itself inclined to go farther than
would have been expected from its usual attitude and the reproaches
of the opposition. This happens on occasions when the Ministr y
expressly displays a special interest in a financial grant. For
example, some years ago an extra salary of £x,ooo proposed by
the Ministry with great vigour for Huskisson, 2 who was so highly
1 Joseph Hume (1777-I85s), who took 'the sense of the House for a saving
of eighteenpence' and added 'retrenchment' to his radical party's watchword.
• When he became President of the Board of Trade in 1823 he resigned his
agency for the Cape, a salaried office of £1,200 per annum.

The English Reform Bill
regarded and who gave up a lucrative post because of his official
business at the Board of Trade, was voted down by a large majority.
So also the same thing has frequently happened with proposals
for increasing the establishment of the royal princes which, for
England, is not extravagantly assessed. In these cases affecting a
personality and a sense of dignity, passion has overcome the luke­
warmness usually evinced by Parliament for economies.
This much at least is clear, that no Reform Bill can directly annul
the causes of high taxation in England. The example of England
and France might in fact lead to the induction that countries in
which the administration of the state depends on the assent of
assemblies [ 293] chosen by the people are those most heavily
burdened by taxes.1 In France, where the aim of the English
Reform Bill-extending the franchise to a more considerable num­
ber of citizens-has to a large extent been achieved, the budget has
been compared, in French newspapers, with a hopeful child who
is to make significant progress daily. In order to hit upon radical
measures for diminishing the oppressive character of the English
political administration, it would have been necessary to trespass
too deeply on the inner constitution of particular rights. No power
is available, having regard to the enormous wealth of private in­
dividuals, to make serious arrangements for diminishing the pro­
digious national debt substantially. The exorbitant cost of the
chaotic administration of justice (which makes the road to court
open to the rich alone), the poor-ratP. which a ministry could not
introduce in Ireland where need and· justice alike demanded it,
the utilization of ecclesiastical revenues (to be further mentioned
below), and many other great branches of society, presuppose, for
the making of any change, other changes in the power of the state
than those stipulated in the Reform Bill.
Occasionally reference has been made in Parliament to the aboli­
tion of ecclesiastical tithes, manorial rights, and the game laws which
has come about in F ranee. All this, it is said, would come about under
the auspices of a patriotic king and a reformed Parliament. And the
drift of the argument seems to characterize the cancellation of rights of
that kind as a lamentable overthrow of the whole constitution, quite
apart from the fact that it had had appalling anarchy as its conse­
quence in France. We all know that in other states rights of this
kind have vanished without any such consequences; not only so, but
1 Cf. Ph.d.R., Zusatz to § 302.

The English Reform Bill
their abolition is regarded as an important basis of increased welfare
and essential freedom. Therefore something more may be adduced
here about them.
First, as to tithes, the oppressive character of this tax has been
obvious in England for long past. A special hatred is generally
directed against a tax of this kind, but in England [ 294] this hatred
cannot astonish anyone, since in many districts there the clergy­
man has collected for him every day every tenth jug of milk from
the cowherds, a tenth of the day's eggs, &c. Moreover, this tax has
been cavilled at on the score of unfairness, because the more the
produce of the ground is increased by industry, time, and expendi­
ture, the higher the tax rises, with the result that the improvement
of agriculture, in which large capital resources have been sunk in
England, is burdened with a tax instead of being encouraged. The
tithe belongs to the Church of England; in other countries, Pro­
testant ones especially, either recently or long ago (in Prussian
territory more than a century ago) tithes have been abolished, or
made redeemable, unostentatiously and unobtrusively without
either spoliation or injustice. The ecclesiastical revenues have been
deprived of their oppressive character and they have been raised
in a more appropriate and becoming manner.
But, in England, the nature of the original justification of tithe
is essentially fading away, or is turned upside down for other
reasons. The application of tithe for the maintenance of religious
doctrine and the up building and support of the Church has mostly
been transformed into a sort of private property revenue. The
clergyman's office has the character of a living and the duties of it
have changed into rights to an income. Apart from the fact that
a number of lucrative benefices, [such as] canonries, entail no
official duties at all, it is only too well known how common it is
for the English clergy to occupy themselves with anything but the
functions of their office, with hunting, &c., and idleness of other
kinds, to dissipate. the rich revenues of their places in foreign
travel, and to hand over their official duties to a poor curate for
a pittance that hardly saves him from dying of hunger. A com­
prehensive idea of the connexion between holding a benefice and
drawing its revenues on the one hand and the . moral conduct and
the fulfilment of official duties on the other is afforded by an
example that was the subject of court proceedings a few years ago.
A motion came before the court against a clergyman named
--

The English Reform Bill 305
Frank,X to the effect that, on account of insanity, [ 295] he was
incapable of managing his propert y and that it should be put in
ward. He had a living of £8oo per annum, and other benefices of
about £6oo. But the judicial complaint was brought before the court
by his son, as having now reached his majority, in the interests
of the family. As a result of many days' [proceedings] and a mass of
testimony, the publicly proved demonstration of the alleged lunacy
brought to light actions of this clergyman of which, wholly un­
disturbed by a spiritual authority, he had acknowledged his guilt
in the course of years; for example, he was once drawn in broad
daylight through the streets and over the bridge of his town with
a strumpet from a house of ill fame on each arm and pursued by
a lot of sneering street-arabs. Still more scandalous were the
stories, likewise confirmed by witnesses, of his relations with his
own wife and a lover of hers who lived in the same house. This
shamelessness in a clergyman of the English Church was no detri­
ment to his possession of his office or to his enjoyment of the
income of his benefices. Examples of this kind bring the Church
into contempt, especially because, despite the establishment of an
episcopal hierarchy, the Church does not itself check corruption
of this kind and the scandal it entails. This contempt, like the
greed of other clergy in the collection of their tithes, makes its own
contribution towards diminishing the respect demanded of the
English people for the Church's property rights. Such property,
being destined for religious purposes, has a totally different charac­
ter from that of private property which can be disposed of at will;
this difference is the basis of a different [kind of] right, and the
enjoyment of these goods is tied up with duties as conditions of
their possession; and in Protestant states it is religious purposes
which fundamentally justify the state in taking steps for the fulfil­
ment of these purposes and the duties connected with the revenues;
considerations of this kind seem to be altogether foreign and unknown
to English heads [296]. But in this matter, to stick to the abstract
outlook of private rights is far too much to the advantage of the
class with the preponderating influence in Parliament. Therefore
this class hangs together with the Ministr y, which has the chief
and most lucrative benefices in its gift, and has an interest in
providing with livings of this sort younger sons or brothers who
' This case does not appear in The A nnual Register. But for another clerical
scandal not wholly dissimilar, seeN. Gash, op. cit., p. 375·
827148 X

The Ettglish Reform Bill
are left without capital because landed property in England
generally goes to the eldest son. This same class is to retain and
even increase its place in Parliament under the Reform Bill. Ther e­
fore it is very doubtful if it has anything to fear for its interest so
far as the wealth of the Church and its patronage are concerned .
Fears of a reform of such a state of affairs in the English Churc h
have every reason to extend especially to its establishment in
Ireland, which has been so heavily attacked for many years, prin ­
cipally in the cause of furthering Catholic emancipation-in itself
only a political matter. It is well known that the majority of the
Irish population adheres to the Catholic Church. The property that
once belonged to it, the churches themselves, tithes, the obligation
of parishioners to keep the church buildings in good repair and to
provide furnishings for worship and wages for sextons, &c., all
this has been taken away from it by right of conquest and made
the property of the Anglican Church. In Germany, for more than
150 years as a result of the Thirty Years War, and in recent times
as a result of the advance of reason, every dominion, province,
city, or village has retained the property belonging to the chur ch
of its inhabitants. The religion of prince and government has not
abso.rbed in its area the ecclesiastical properties belonging to
another denomination. Even the Turks have generally left alone
the churches of their Christian , Armenian, and Jewish subjects ;
even where these subjects have been forbidden to repair their
churches when dilapidated, they were still allowed leave to buy
permission to do so. But the English have taken all the church es
away from their conquered Catholic population [ 297]. The Irish,
whose poverty and misery and consequential degradation and
demoralization is a standing theme in Parliament, acknowledged
by every Ministry, are compelled, out of the few .pence they may
have, to pay their own priest and construct a place for their ser­
vices. On the other hand, they have to pay a tenth of all their
produce to Anglic~ clergymen, in whose large incumbenci es,
comprising two or three or six or more parishes, there are often only
very few Protestants, and sometimes the sexton is the only one.
They are even forced to pay for the upkeep of the churches that
are now Anglican and for providing plate, &c., for the services.
The foes of emancipation h,ave urged, as a bugbear, that the reform
of such crying injustice would be the pro,bable consequence of
emancipation. Its friends, however, and their followers, have on

The English Reform Bill 307
the contrary contented themselves at bottom with the thought
that, with emancipation, the demands of the Catholics will be
satisfied and the establishment of the English Church in Ireland
will be all the more secure. This situation, unprecedented in a
civilized and Protestant nation, and its legal title, are supported by
self-interest and up to now have held out against what must be
presumed to be the religious temper of the Anglican clergy and
against the rationality of the English people and its Members of
Parliament. True, the Reform Bill does assign a few more seats in
the Commons to the Irish, and the Catholics may occupy them.
But this might be more than counterbalanced by the provision in
the same Bill for increasing the number of members drawn from
that class whose interest is linked with the present position of the
Anglican Church in Ireland.
There is likewise an apprehension that the reform will in due
course extend to manorial rights. For long past these rights have
not merely brought the agricultural class into subjection; they
press as heavily on the bulk of that class as villeinage did, indeed
they bring it down to an indigence worse than a villein's. In Eng­
land itself, though incapacitated for the possession [ 298] of pro­
perty in land and reduced to the status of tenants or day labourers,
this class does find work to some extent in times of prosperity,
England being generally opulent and possessed, in particular, of
prodigious manufactures; but what really keeps it from the con­
sequences of extreme indigence is the poor law which imposes on
every parish the obligation of looking after its poor. In Ireland, on
the other hand, this protection is not available to the class which
lives on agriculture and is generally propertyless. The descriptions
of travellers, as well as documented parliamentary reports, picture
the general condition of the Irish peasants as so miserable that it
is not easy to find a parallel example in small and poor districts of
continental countries, even in those of them that are backward in
civilization. The propertylessness of the agricultural class has its
origin in the circumstances and the legislation of the old feudal
system, which, in the form in which it still exists in many states,
does at least assure to the peasant a subsistence from the soil that
he cultivates and to which he is bound. But while the Irish villeins
do possess personal freedom, the lords of the manor have got
propert y into their own hands so completely that they have cut
themsel ves free from any obligation to look after the subsistence

The English Reform Bill
of the people who till their soil for them. Thi s is the justification
of the fact that, if landown ers find more profitable a mode of
cultivation which needs fewer labourers, then those who cultivated
the ground hitherto and who were tied to it for their subsistence ,
just as villeins were, and whose families had lived there in hut s
for centuries, cultivating the soil, are driven in hundreds , even
thousands, from the huts which they lived in but did not own.
Those who already own nothing are deprived of their birthpl ace
and their hereditary means of livelihood- in the name of justic e.
And this too is justice, that the landowners have the huts burnt so
as to make sure of getting the peasants off the ground and cut off
their chance of delaying their departure or creeping in und er
shelter again.
These cankers in Ireland 1 are laid before Parliament year in
year out. How many speeches are made on them! How many com­
mittees have sat! How many witnesses have been examined! (299]
How many sound reports have been drawn up! How many remedi es
have been proposed which appear either unsatisfactory or impra c­
ticable! The proposed withdrawal of the surplus poor by coloniza­
tion would have had to take away at least a million inhabitants if
it was to be likely to have any effect. How could this be achieved ?
For another thing, the empty space thus produced would very
quickly be filled in the same way as before if laws and circum­
stances remained otherwise the same. An Act of Parliament (the
Sub-letting Act)2 which was meant to restrict division into small
tenancies, the method of accommodating a fertile class of beggars
in Ireland, and their breeding-ground, was shown to be so little
adapted to remed y the evil that it had to be repealed recently after
a few experimental years. The moment of transition from feud al
tenure to property has slipped by without giving the farmer class
the chance to own land; a chance of achieving this might have been
afforded by altering rights of inheritance, introducing an equal
distribution of patrimony between the children, allowing distrain t
and the sale of property for the payment of debts, and in general
altering that legal character of propert y in land which carries
with it who can say what formalities and costs in connexion with
1 Hegel writes 'Eng land'.
2 7 Geo. IV, xxix (1826). On 18 March 1831 Melbourne introduced in the
House of Lords a Bill to repeal this Act, but the object was to frame new legisla­
tion to secure more effectually the object of the earlier Act.

The English Reform Bill
alienation , &c. But English legislation about property in these and
other respects has got too far away from the freedom enjoyed in
this matter by continental countries; every private relationship is
caught too deeply in these fetters. Moreover, to alter the law in
order to open for the class that works the land the possibility of
acquiring property in land would only be in the highest degree
insignificant in relation to the whole situation. The power of the
Crown is too weak to see to this transition. Moreover, under the
Reform Bill, parliamentar y legislation remains in the hands of
that 1lass which has its interest, and still more its fixed habits, in
the hitherto existing law of property. Hitherto its aim has always
been to remedy the results of the system, when need and misery
became too crying, by direct action and so by palliatives (like the
Sub-letting Act) or by pious aspirations (that the Irish land­
owners should take up residence in Ireland , &c.).
[3oo] The Game Laws, again, are mentioned as a m atter that
might be open to reform . To touch it is to cut to the heart numer­
ous English Members of Parliament and their connexions, but the
nuisance and the mischief have become too great for the urging of
a change in these laws not to have become inevitable. Universal
attention has been drawn in particular to the increase in the number
of gamekeepers assaulted and murdered by poachers, to the in­
creasing loss of game suffered by landed proprietors on their
estates , e specially to the increase in the crimes of poaching
coming before the courts, though they are only a small proportion
of those actually committed, and furthermore to the dispropor­
tionatel y harsh punishm ents prescribed by law and actually in­
flicted for the infringement of game laws, because it is just the
aristocrats , who possess these rights, who made the laws and who
then sit in court in their capacity as magistr ates and jurymen. The
interest of the hunting fraternit y is likewise engrossed by the great
extension of hunting rights in open countr y. A squire 's son has
hunting rights and every parson counts as a squire, so that the son
may have this privilege which his father, unless himself a squire's
son, does not possess, &c. For many years past a Bill has been
introduced annually into Parliament for amending these laws, but
no such Bill has yet had the luck to be passed in face of the
privileged interest of sportsm en.1 A Bill of this kind is before the
1 By the existing game laws only those persons were permitted to take or sell
game who were dul y qualified . The ordina ry qualification was ownership of

JIO The English Reform Bill
present Parliament. It must be regarded as very much of a problem
to assess the amount of influence the projected Reform Bill would
inevitably have on the legislation about hunting rights, on the
reduction of punishments, on the restriction of personal huntin g
rights, and especially, in the interest of the agricultural class, on
the right of hunting stags, hares, foxes with a string of hounds and
twenty, thirty, or more riders and with still more on foot throu gh
sown fields and all cultivated unenclosed land. In many Germa n
provinces a standing article in the grievances of the Estates long
ago was the damage caused by game, the havoc caused in fields by
hunting , and the consumption of crops and fruit by game [301].
Up till now English freedom has put no restriction on these rights
which princes in German y have long ago renounced in the inter est
of their subjects.
The extensive jumble of English private law, which even English­
men master their pride in their freedom sufficiently to call an
Augean stable, might well afford grounds for hoping for some
tidying up. The little that Robert Peel carried through a few years
ago is regarded as most valuable and has won universal praise. 1
More .comprehensive proposals for the reform of justice, advanced
later by the present Lord Chancellor, Brougham, in a seven-hou r
speech, and heard with great acceptance, 2 did give rise to the
appointment of committees but so far have remained withou t
further result. What has been achieved in German y for more than
a century by the imperceptible work of scientific education, the
wisdom of princes and their love of justice, the English nation has
not acquired from its popular representation; and in the new Bill
there are just not contained those special features which would
provide a preponderance to profound insight and true knowledge
over the crass igorance of fox-hunters and landed gentry, over an
education acquired simply in social gatherings or through news­
papers and parliamentar y debates , or over the adroitness of lawyers,
which is generally acquired solely through routine. The qualifica­
tions required in Germany , even from the well born and from
wealthy landowners if they are to take part in public administrati on
lands of £roo yearly v alue: but others could be qualified, such as the sons of
esquires or persons of higher degree. A p arson with a life intere st in h is l iving
worth £rso per annum would be qualifi ed. These restrictions were removed by
I and 2 William IV, c. 32 .
' See N. Gash , Mr. S ecretary Peel, Chapters 9 and 14.
2 1828 in H. of C. See F. Hawes, Henry Brougham (Londo n, 1957), p. 2 0 1.

The English Reform Bill 311
or politics either in general or in special spheres, namely theo­
retical study, scientific education, practice and experience in
affairs-are to be found as little in the new Bill as in the organiza­
tion existing hitherto, as qualifications of members of an assembly
in whose hands lies the most extensive power of government and
administration. Nowhere more than in England is the prejudice so
fixed and so naive that if birth and wealth give a man office they
also give him brains. 1 [302] Even the new Bill contains no condi­
tion of this kind: it sanctions the principle that · a free income of
£10 dr wn from property in land is a full qualification for the task
of judging and deciding on a man's capacity for the business of
government and financial administration which lies with Parlia­
ment. The idea of a board of examiners drawn from intelligent
men, experienced in the duties of office, instead of a mass of
individuals qualified only by the £10 income, like the idea of
demanding proofs of capacity from candidates for the legislature
and political administration, is of course an idea far too far away
from the idea of the unconditional sovereignty of those entitled to
decisions on this matter.
Those material changes demanded by rational law which have
been touched upon above, and others as well, have been secured
already in many civilized continental states, especially in the Ger­
man countries, but the need for them seems almost to have gone
to sleep in England. Thus the necessity of reform has not been
shown up as a result of experiencing the little or nothing done by
Parliament in this matter during the persistence of the sort of rights
to the patronage of parliamentary seats that has existed hitherto;
England is in agreement with what the Duke of Wellington said
recently in the House of Lords, that 'from the year 1688' (the year
of the Revolution which drove from the throne the House of
Stuart with its Catholic mentality) 'until now the country's affairs
have been conducted in the best and most glorious way through
the union of the wealth, talents, and innumerable skills which have
represented the great interests of the kingdom'. 2 National pride in
any case keeps the English back from studying and understanding
the progress made by other nations in the development of their
legal institutions. The pomp and display of the formal freedom to
1 Cf. Ph.d.R. , Preface, Eng. tr., p. 8.
2 Duke of W ellington's Speeches in Parliament, vol. i, p. 410 (28 March I831).
Hegel apparently quotes from a newspaper report which is textually different.

312 The English Reform Bill
discuss public business in Parliament, and in other assemblies of
all classes and groups, and to settle these matters in Parliam ent,
as well as the title to do so without any qualifications , inhibit s in
England [303] or at least does not encourage quiet reflection on
and penetration into the essence of legislation and governm ent.
Few European nations are dominated by such dexterity of reason­
ing in terms of their prejudices and by such shallowness of prin­
ciple. Fame and wealth [in England] make it superfluous to go
back to the foundations of existing rights, a process to which
external need, and the need of reason. thereby aroused , has driven
peoples who have felt existing rights oppressive.
[3. O U TLOOK FOR PARLI AME NT AR Y R EFORM]
We return to the less material points more immediatel y con­
nected with the present Reform Bill. One point of great import ance,
also stressed by the opponents of the Bill, is that in Parliam ent the
various great interests of the nation ought to be represent ed and
[the question is] what alteration this representation would now
suffer as a result of this Bill.
Views on this matter seem to differ. The Duke of Wellington
says1 that, under the Bill in question, the greater part of the el ec­
tors would consist of shopkeeprs, and that thus the interest s of
trade would seem to gain advantage; but there is a general view,
on which great stress in laid in the Bill's favour, that landowners
and the agricultural interest will not only lose nothing of their
influence, but will more likely gain a relative increase, because the
proposal in relation to the electoral rights that are to be cancelled2
is to give to the big cities or to the trading interest only twenty-five
members, while the other eighty-one are to go to counties or the
landed interest together with the smaller burghs, where into the
bargain the influence of the landed proprietor usually prevails. In
this matter it is especially remarkable that a number of commercial
people, namely the ·leading bankers in London who are connected
with the East India Company and the Bank of England , have
declared themselves against the Bill [304]. Their reason is that,
while this measure aims at establishing the representation of the
kingdom on the great foundation of propert y and at extendin g this
foundation , it would close the chief avenues whereby the moneyed,
1 Duke of Welling ton's Speeches in Parliament, vol. i, p . 411.
2 'Transferred ' w ould be more a ccur ate than 'canc elled'.

The English Reform Bill
trading, shipping, and colonial interests have been represented in
Parliament along with all other interests throughout the country
and in all its foreign possessions down to the remotest corner.
These avenues are the places and small boroughs where a seat
in Parliament is directly available for purchase. Consequently it
was hitherto possible by the route of ordinary trade to arrange with
certainty that bank directors, like directors of the East India Com­
pany, had seats in Parliament, just as the great plantation owners
in the West Indies and other business men, who do.minate equally
great ranches of trade , likewise confidently expected seats too, so
that attention would be paid to their interests and those of their
associates, which in · any case are of course so important for the
national interest in England. From the last Parliament the Bank
Director Manning, who had sat there for many years, was expelled
on the ground that his opponent had proved that he had used
bribery in his election. 1 That the different great interests of the
realm should be represented in its great deliberative assembly is a
characteristic point of view in England, and in its own way it has
been a fundamental article in the constitution of the older Imperial
and local Estates in all the European monarchies, just as, for
example in the Swedish constitution, it is still the basis of member­
ship of the Diet. This is opposed to the modern principle in
accordance with which only the abstract will of individuals as such
is to be represented. It is true that in England it is the subjective
whim of noblemen and others with electoral privileges that con­
stitutes the basis of nomination to se.ats, and ther efore the repre­
sentation of interests is left to chance. But still this subjective
whim counts with such importance and so momentously that the
most eminent bankers are not ashamed to embark on the corruption
involved in the sale of parliamentary seats and to complain
in a public declaration to Parliament that these great interests
would [305] find closed to them by the Bill this route for their
representation in Parliament, this route which, being via bribery,
was not exposed to accident. Moral considerations weaken such
an important point of view, but it is a defect in a constitution to
leave to chance what is necessary and to compel people to attain
1 There is some confusion here . W. Manning was elected M.P . for Penryn
(a rott en borough) in 1826. A petition was brought against his return . The House
of Common s found that there had been bribery but that he was not concerned
in it. He was the father of Cardinal Manning.

The English Reform Bill
the necessary end by way of the corruption which m9rality con­
demns. The interests divided organically into classes, as they are
in the cited example of Sweden into the classes of the nobility, the
clergy, the bourgeois, and the peasants, no longer correspond com­
pletely with the situation in most states since the time when, as in
England, the other interests mentioned above have become power­
ful. This discrepancy would nevertheless be easy to set aside if the
earlier basis of inner constitutional law were understood once more,
i.e. if the real basic constituents of the life of the state, granted that
they be really distinct, and granted that substantial consideration
must be given by government and administration to their distinc­
tive worth, were to be consciously and expressly brought to the fore,
recognized, and, when they were to be discussed or when decisions
were to be taken about them, allowed to speak for themsel ves
without this being left to chance. Napoleon, in a constitution which
he gave to the kingdom of Italy, divided the right of representatio n
in the sense of this outlook between Possidenti, Dotti, and Merchanti.
In the earlier parliamentary debates on proposals for very in­
complete reforms, a principal reason raised against them, and
adduced now too, was that all great interests were represented in
hitherto existing [arrangements for] parliamentary seats, and that
affairs, not individuals as such, should have an opportunity to
express themselves and make themselves prevail. This argument
is not pursued in further detail, but there seems to enter into it
a point which the Duke of Wellington earnestly pressed on the
Lords in his last speech, as a point overlooked alike there and in the
Commons, namely that what they had to create was a legislative
assembly, not a corporation of the enfranchised, a House of Com­
mons and not a new system for its constituents. 1 If it were not
a matter of the right to enfranchi,sement and therefore of [3o6] who
were to be the constituents, but of the result, the creation of a
legislative assembly and a Lower House, it might of course be said
that such a House w~s constituted already in accordance with the
hitherto existing law on representation. Indeed in the course of
his speech the Duke cites the evidence of a friend 2 of the Reform
Bill to the effect that the present House of Commons is so form ed
that no better could be elected. And in fact there lies in the Reform
Bill itself no further guarantee that a House elected in accordanc e
1 Duke of Wellington 's Speeches in Parliament, vol. i, p. 406.
2 Lord Lansdowne, ibid., p . 407.

The English Reform Bill
with its provisions and in transgression of the previously existing
positive rights would be any more excellent.
These rights the Duke put in his speech on the same footing as
the right on the strength of which he could as little lose his seat in
the Upper House as the Prime Minister, Earl Grey, could be
deprived of his properties in Y orkshire. 1 In any case the Bill con­
tains the new principle that the privileged franchise is no longer
placed in the same category with strict property rights. From this
point of view we must recognize as correct that charge made by
oppon<':nts of the Bill, namely that precisely in virtue of this new
principle itself the Bill is downright illogical. A more personal and
more offensive charge2 lies in the statement that the line of de­
marcation by which electoral rights were . to be left to privileged
smaller towns was drawn in such a way as to leave untouched the
boroughs belonging to the Duke of Bedford, whose brother, Lord
John Russell, had introduced the Bill in the Commons. In fact the
Bill is a hotchpotc~ of the old privileges and the general principle
of the equal entitlement of all citizens (except for the external
limitation of a freehold of £10)3 to vote for those by whom they
are to be represented. Thus the Bill contains an internal con­
tradiction between positive rights and an abstract and theoretical
principle. Therefore the illogicality of what is derived from the
basis of the old feudal law is shown up in a cruder light than if all
entitlements to voting had been put on one and the same footing
of positive rights.
This principle does in itself open the way for an infinity [307]
of claims on which Parliament can indeed prima facie impose
limits ; carried out logically it would produce a revolution rather
than a mere reform. But that such further claims may not be
pressed very energetically so soon is the inference from the fact
that the middle and lower classes in the three kingdoms seem to be
very generally satisfied with the Bill. The so-called practical sense
of the British people, its concentration on gain, subsistence, wealth,
does not seem yet to have been much touched by needs for the
1 Ibid ., p. 406, not Grey but Brougham , and there is no reference to York­
shire. In any case Grey 's seat was in Northumberland, but Hegel may confuse
that coun ty with Yorkshire. See below, p. 316, n. 4·
2 Croker and others made this charge in the debate on leave to introduce the
Reform Bill, 1-9 March 1831.
3 The basis of borough franchise laid down in the Bill was occupation, whether
as owner or tenant, of property of £10 annual value. Hegel is mistaken here .

The English Reform Bill
· above-mentioned material rights. Still less efficacious in Britain is
the purely formal principle of equality. The fanaticism of prin ­
ciples like that is foreign to the British mind. Indeed this British
practical sense is involved in an immediate loss because a great
mass of people lose the gain from bribes because of the rise in the
voting qualification from forty shillings to two hundred. 1 If this
higher class2 has hitherto derived a cash advantage from its votes,
it will not lose it. An M.P. elected for Liverpool has just been
excluded from Parliament because the voters have been proved to
have taken bribes. The electors in this city are very numerous , and
it is a wealthy place; so one would expect that amongst the brib ed
a number of well-to-do people will have been found as well.
Further, just as the big landowners knew how to make out that
hundreds and thousands of their propertyless tenants were owners
of a forty-shilling freehold, so this peculiar method of creatin g
votes will operate again under the new qualification, and these same
dependants will appear in the disguise of £Io freeholders. Equally
unlikely, [3o8] despite the elevation of the qualifying freehold, is the
disappearance of the numerous weeks of feasting and drinking in
which the English masses, with their unbounded bestiality, were
encouraged to indulge and in which they got their pay.3 At the last
election but one it was stated that in the populous county of York
£8o,ooo sterling had been disbursed for the election of a land­
owner there, Beaumont.4 In parliamentary debates it has been
alleged that the election expenses have gradually become all too
high; thus the question arises of how the people are to regard the
fact that the rich will make savings at their expense. It is still un­
decided how it will stand with this matter of material advantag e,
1 There is further confusion here. While the borough franchise was based on
the £10 householder, the county franchise of 40s. freehold still remained. Th is
confusion persists in what follows . Hegel seems to have confused the provi sions of
the English Reform Bill with those of the Irish Bill which accompanied Catholic
emancipation . In the latter the franchise qualification was elevated everywh ere
from 40s. to £Io. ·
z This higher class of £Io freeholders has recently been stig matized by the
name of 'paupers' in the Upper House. [H.]
3 Reading Boumann 's text.
4 In one of the last sittings of Parliam ent £1zo,ooo was quoted as the expendi­
ture on the Liverpool election mentioned above . [H.] T. W. Beaumon t was a
wealthy landowner elected for his County of Northumberland in 1818 and 18zo.
Defeated in 1826 he was elected again in 1830 in a contested election. Coun ty
elections were expensive, if conte sted , as they rar ely were. The Yorksh ire elec­
tion of I8z6 was estimated to have cost £Iso,ooo .

The English Reform Bill
and what new combinations the tireless speculation of agents con­
cerned with the trad e in parliamentary seats will produce; it would
be too soon to make conjectures about the change which confronts
this interest.
But a higher interest seems to be afforded by the franchise itself
by the very fact that of itself it awakens a desire and a demand for
its more general distribution. Nevertheless experience proves that
the exercise of the right to vote is not so attractive as to provoke
strong claims or the movements to which they give rise. On the
contrar y, what seems to prevail in the electorate is great indiffer­
ence, despite the associated interest derived from the receipt of
bribes. From the large class of those who lose their votes because
of the raising of the electoral qualification 1 or whose rights are
weakened because their votes are cast [along with those of] the
general mass of voters in the county, no petitions against a Bill so
disadvantageous to them have come forward. On the other hand,
the protests that have been raised come from those whose certainty
or probability of election to a seat in Parliament has been impaired
or altogether lost. By an Act of Parliament a year ago the freehold
qualification for a vote in Ireland was raised and as a result
zoo,ooo persons lost their votes, [309] without their making any
complaint about this loss of their qualification for participating [as
voters] in affairs of state and government. In any event, the electors
see in their right a property which accrues to the benefit of those
alone who wish to be elected to P~rliament and ·on the altar of
whose personal opinion, whim, and interest everything implicit in
this right of participating in government and legislation is to be
sacrificed.
The chief election job for which candidates recruit agents ac­
quainted with localities and personalities, as well as with the way
of handling them , is to hunt out electors and bring them forward,
especially by bribery, to cast their votes in favour of their patrons .
The great landowners get their crowds of tenants herded to the poll,
some of them, as was said above, being disguised for the moment
as owners of the requisite freehold. Brougham humorously de­
scribed a scene at his former election where tenants were camped
in court yards w ith fires, pudding, and porter and, to withdraw
' Once again the same confusion between the Irish Bill and the English.
Under the latter only non-resident voters were disqualified; in other instances
the franchise was continued to possessors during their lifetime.

The English Reform Bill
them from the influence of the opposition, locked up until the
very moment when they had to cast their obedient vote. This
indifference to the franchise ana· its exercise is in the highest degree
in contrast with the fact that it is in this right that ther e lies
the right of the people to participate in public affairs and in the
highest interests of the state and the government. The exercise
of this right is a lofty duty, because there rests on it the constituti ng
of an essential part of the public authority, i.e. the repres enta­
tive assembly, because indeed this right and its exercise is, as the
French say, the act, the sole act, of the 'sovereignty of the people'.
From this indifference to the franchise we can easily draw an
indictment against a people on the score of its political obtusene ss
or corruption, just as we can from the custom of bribery when the
right to vote is exercised. Yet this harsh judgement must be softened
if we ponder what must obviously contribute to such lukewarmn ess:
namely, the sense that amongst the many thousands of votes cast
at an election a single vote is actually insignificant. [310] Out of
the approximately 658 members who are to be elected w the House
of Commons or the 430 to be elected to the French Chamber (the
forthcoming changes to be made in these figures do not matt er
here) it is only one member who is to be chosen [in a given con­
stituency] and this is a very inconsiderable fraction of the total
number: but the single vote is an even more insignificant fraction
of the total of 100 or 1,ooo votes which secure one memb er's
election. The number of voters to be on the roll under the new
French electoral law is assessed at zoo,ooo; the number of mem­
bers to be elected is given in round figures as 450. It follows that
one vote is a two-hundred-thousandth part of the total voting
power and the ninety-millionth part of one of the three branch es
of the legislative power.
The individual scarcely brings to mind in figures like these the
triviality of his effectiveness, but nevertheless he has a definite
inkling of this qua.ntitative insignificance of his vote, and the
quantitative consideration, the number of votes, is here what in
practice is alone decisive. Of course the qualitatively 1 high con­
siderations of freedom, duty, exercise of sovereign rights, parti cipa­
tion in general affairs of state, may be emphasized against indolence .
[But] sound common sense is glad to stop at what is effective. If
1 Reading qualitativen with Bournann. Lasson and Hoffmeister both read
quantitativen, but this must be a misprint or a lapsus calami of Hegel 's.

The English Reform Bill
the individual has brought before him the usual story that, if
everyone thought so indolently, the state's existence and, above all,
freedom itself would be jeopardized, he is bound to remind him­
self just as much of the principle on which his duty and his whole
right to freedom is built, namely that he should let himself be
guided not by considering what others do but solely by his own
will, and that what is finally decisive for him, what is even duly
acknowledged as his sovereign, is his own individual volition.
In any case this influence, in itself so trivial, is restricted to
[influence on the choice of] persons, and it becomes infinitely more
trivial by reason of the fact that it has no bearing on the thing;
indeed the latter is expressly excluded [from popular influence].
Only in the French democratic constitution of the year III under
Robespierre-a constitution adopted by the whole people but of
course all the less [3 II] carried into effect-was it prescribed that
laws on public affairs were to be brought before individual citizens
for confirmation.
Further, the electors are not even constituents giving instructions
to their delegates. The programmes which the members of the
National Assembly took with them from their election were at once
cast aside and forgotten by both parties. It counts as one of the
most fundamental constitutional principles in England and France
that members, once elected, are just as sovereign in casting their
parliamentary votes as their electors were when they cast their votes.
In both countries members in their deliberations and resolutions
on public business · do not have the character of officials and they
share with the King what is sanctioned for him, namely answer­
ability to no one for the fulfilment of their duties.
In consequence of the feeling of the actually trivial influence of
an individual and his sovereign choice (which is tied up with the
franchise), experience teaches that elections are not in general
attended by many. The numbers, that we sometimes find in news­
papers, of those legally entitled to vote and of those who actually
cast a vote at an election have usually been obviously very different
from one another in the turbulent days of Charles X's 1 last years
on the throne. In the most recent election held in the centre of
political interest, i.e. in Paris, where the parties seem to have shown
no lack of zeal in summoning the electors to cast their votes, it was
stated that of about 1,750 voters some 6oo did not put in an
1 King of France, 1824-30.

320 The English Reform Bill
appearance. In this connexion it might be interesting to get to
know the average proportion of voters to votes actually cast in
other areas where all the citizens are enfranchised and where the
franchise affects a much nearer interest of theirs, e.g. in elections
for choosing town councillors in Prussia.
In the earlier years of the French Revolution the zeal and the
behaviour of the J acobins at elections disgusted peaceful and
decent citizens and even made it dangerous for them to cast their
votes. So faction alone held the field.
While [312] the great political bodies which are now making
decisions about the franchise think that they are fulfilling a duty
of high justice by enlarging the external qualifications for this
privilege and granting it to a larger number of people, they do not
reflect that they are thereby diminishing the influence of the in­
dividual, weakening his idea of its importance and consequentiall y
his interest in exercising this right. Still less do they ask thems elves
how any political power at all comes to dispose of this right of the
citizens by taking into consideration fifty or a hundred francs or so
many pounds sterling and altering this right in accordance with
amounts like these. This right in its essential character is accepted
as sovereign, elementary, inalienable; in short as the opposit e of
something which can be bestowed or taken away.
The so well-reputed sound common sense of the English people
makes individuals feel the insignificance of the influence the y exer­
cise on public affairs by their single votes. Moreover, this same
common sense gives them a proper sense of their general ignoranc e
and their slender capacity for judging the talents, acquaint ance
with business, skill, and education required in high officers of
state. Is it to be supposed that such a great increase in capacity
is involved in possessing a freehold of forty shillings or ten pound s
or paying two hundred francs in direct taxes (whether the addi­
tional centimes are reckoned in or not)? The rigidity of the Frenc h
Chambers in disreg_arding any qualification except that which is
supposed to lie in the 200 francs (with or without the additional
centimes), and ascribing this qualification solely to member s of
the Institute, is characteristic enough. The formalism of respecting
the 200 francs has obliterated respect for the capacity and good
will of prefects, councillors, doctors , advocates, &c., who do not
pay so much in taxes.
Moreover, the voters know that, on the strength of their sovereign
--

The English Reform Bill 321
right, they are exempt from having to have in advance a judgement
on, or indeed an examination [3 1 3] of, the candidates and that they
have to decide without anything of this kind. Thus it is no wonder
at all that in England a great number of individuals-no matter
whether a majority of them- require to be stimulated by the candi­
dates before they will take what is to them the trifling trouble of
voting, and for their trouble, which advantages the candidates,
they have to be compensated by them with badges, roasts, beer,
and a few guineas. The French are newer in this political path, and
they have not yet sunk so far into this sort of compensation , doubt­
less through the pressure of the vital interests of their situation
which has not yet bet:n deeply consolidated and which indeed has
become one of the most deadly danger. But since they have been
roused to take things and their share in them more seriously,
they have seized a share in things for themselves in insurrections,
clubs, associations, &c., and have thus gained a right and found
compensation for the triviality of the part which their individual
sovereignty plays in public affairs.
(4. THE DIVISION OF THE POWERS OF GOVERNMENT]
The peculiarity, which has just been touched on, of one power in
England which is supposed to be subordinate and whose members
yet make decisions on the whole of the affairs of state without being
instructed, without accountability, without being officials, is the
basis of a relationship with the monarchical part of the constitution .
Mention must be made of the influence which the Reform Bill may
have on this relationship and on the governing power in general.
For considering this matter it is necessary first to recall the most
immediate consequence of the peculiarity which has been referred
to, namely that in England the power of the Crown and the power
of government are very different from one another. To the power
of the Crown there belong the most important branches of the
supreme control of the state, especially those with a bearing on
[314] other states, the authority to make war and peace, control of
the army, the appointment of Ministers (though it has become
etiquette for the monarch to appoint directly the Prime Minister
only, while the latter puts together the rest of the Cabinet), the
appointment of army commanders and officers, of ambassadors,
&c. Yet it is to Parliament that there belongs the sovereign
decision on the budget (including even the sum allowed for the
827148 y

322 The English Reform Bill
maintenance of the King and his family), i.e. on the entire range of
the means for making war and peace and having an army, ambas­
sadors, &c. Moreover, a Ministry can only govern, i.e. exist, in so
far as it falls in with the views and the will of Parliament. Thus the
share of the monarch in the power of government is more illusory
than real and the substance of this power lies with Parliament.
Sieyes had a great reputation for deep insights into the organiza­
tion of free constitutions. At least, at the transition from the
directorial to the consular constitution, Sieyes was able to extract
from his papers the plan which was to give France the enjoyment
of his experience and profound reflection; it is well known that
this plan put at the pinnacle of the state a· head to whom was to
accrue the pomp of representation in other countries and the
appointment of the supreme state counsellor and the responsibl e
Ministers as well as their subordinate officials.1 Thus the suprem e
power of government was entrusted to this state counsellor while
the Proclamateur-electeur was to have no share in it. Napoleon felt
himself made master and ruler; we all know his soldier-like judge­
ment on this project for such a chief, in whom he saw only the role
of a cochon a l' engrais de quelques millions, a role that no man of
talent and honour would find himself undertaking. In this project
something was genuinely overlooked which in others has been
arranged with full awareness and deliberate intention, i.e. that the
naming of Ministers and the other officials of the executive is in
itself something formal and powerless and that in substance it falls
to wherever the power of government effectively is. In England
we see this power in Parliament; in the numerous · inonarchic al
constitutions created [315] in our experience, the formal separation
of the power of government, as the executive, from a power which
is purely legislative and judiciary is explicitly declared, and the
former power is even set out with pomp and distinction. But the
nomination of the Ministry has always been the centre of disput e
and contention, despite the unconditional ascription to the Crown
of this right of nomination; and the so-called 'purely' legislative
power has carried off the victory. Even in the latest French con­
stitution the government has soon seen itself compelled to transf er
' 9 Nov . 1799. In 1797 Sieyes had drawn up a constitution in which he
proposed a Grand Elector who was to reside in state at Versailles and repr esent
the country to foreign powers but have no immediate authority except that of
nominating the two Consuls who were to exercise the actual powers of govern­
ment.

The English Reform Bill
its headquarters to the Chamber of Deputi es, where it has been
brought even to the point of having to enter into public disputes
with its subordinate officials.
Connected above all with the fact that the power of government
lies in Parliament is an argument advanced by the opponents of
the Reform Bill on behalf of the boroughs through whose posses­
sion many parliamentary seats rest with single individuals or
families, namely that it was by means of this fact that England's
most distinguished statesmen had found their way to Parliament
and thence to the Ministry. It may well be a fact that a remarkable
and profound talent hasoften before nowbeenrecognized byprivate
friendship and is in the position of being able only through some
individual's generosity to attain the due place which otherwise it
could not achieve in view of the deficient resources and family
connexions of the mass of the citizens in a town or county. But
examples of this kind may be ascribed to the realm of chance where
one probability may easily be set against another, and a possible
advantage against a possible disadvantage .
Connected with this is another ostensible consequence of great
importance to which the Duke of Wellington drew attention. (He
has not the look of an orator because he lacks what has given many
Members of Parliament such a great reputation for eloquence,
namely an easy-flowing loquacity continuing for hours at a time and
remarkably rich in self-display. But the Duke's speeches with their
disjointed sentences, for which he has been reproached, are not
lacking in substance or in points that go to the root of the matter.)
He expresses his fear that, in the place of those to whom the care
of the public interest is now entrusted in Parliament, [316] alto­
gether different men will arrive, and he asks once again whether,
as was quoted above, the shopkeepers, of whom in his view the
great majority of the voters will consist as a result of the new Bill,
are the people who ought to elect the members of the great national
council which has to make decisions on domestic and foreign
affairs, on the interests of agriculture, manufacture, and colonies.
The Duke speaks from observation of the English Parliament
where above the mass of members who are incompetent and
ignorant, with a veneer of current prejudices and a culture drawn
from conversation and often not even that, there stands a number
of brilliant men wholly devoted to political activity and the interest
of the state. To the majority of the latter ·a parliamentary seat is

The English Reform Bill
guaranteed partly by their own wealth and the influence which
they themselves or their family have in a borough, city, or count y,
and partly through the influence of the Ministry and then through
their party friends.
To this class there belongs a number of men who make political
activity the business of their life. This may be because it is their
predilection and they have private means, or because they occupy
public positions which they have obtained through a connexion
with parliamentary influence . Even if they have obtained them
by other means, still, either because of their official position or
because of their general inner vocation, they cannot neglect attach ­
ing themselves to a party and to the class of politicians. Wher e the
service of the state is not tied to other qualifications, for example
a degree, passing a government examination, undergoing a course
of preliminary training in affairs, &c., a man must be incorporat ed
into this class; he has to create some importance for himself there;
he is carried by its influence, just as correspondingly his influence
accrues to it. There are a few anomalous cases of individuals
isolated from any party connexion , e.g. Hunt, 1 but when they come
into Parliament they do not fail to make a strange figure .ther e.
Other bonds of the political class-family connexions, political
conversations and speeches at dinners, &c., the endless and world­
wide [3 17] exchange of political correspondence, even the social
gadding about to country seats, horse-races, fox-hunting, &c.­
will of course not be disturbed. But one chief element in the power
of this class, namely the disposal of a number of parliam entary
seats, does suffer through the Reform Bill an important modifica­
tion which may well have the effect which the Duke menti ons,
i.e. many other individuals will appear in place of those belonging
to the present circle of those devoted to the interest of the national
government; but this is likely to bring as its sequel a disturb ance
of the uniformity of the maxims and considerations of that class,
and these constitute · the brains of Parliament. To be sure it does
not appear that Hunt, for example, despite his isolation, goes
beyond the usual notions of the oppression of the people by taxes,
sinecures, &c., but, as a result of reform, the route to Parliament
may be open to ideas which are opposed to the interest of this class
and which therefore have not yet entered its head. Ideas , I mean,
which make up the foundations of a real freedom and which affect
1 Henry ('Orator ') Hunt , I773-183 s, M.P. for Preston , r830 -3 .

The English Reform Bill
the matters above-mentioned-ecclesiastical property and organiza­
tion, duties of the clergy-as well as the manorial and other bizarre
rights and property restrictions derived from feudalism, and
further sections of the chaos of English laws. In France these ideas
have been intermixed with many further abstractions and bound up
with the violent upheavals familiar to us all. But unalloyed, they
have for long past in Germany become fixed principles of inner
conviction and public opinion, and have brought about the actual
peaceful, gradual, and legal transformation of the [old feudal] rights.r
The result is that here we have already made great progress with
the i~stitutions of real freedom; the most important of them we
have established and enjoy already, while the governing power of
[the English] Parliament has scarcely yet brought them seriously
to mind. From the pressing claims of these principles and from
the demand for their immediate realization England might indeed
have to fear an extreme shattering of the bonds of its social and
political life. In England the contrast between prodigious wealth
and utterly embarrassed penury is enormous; just as great, perhaps
still greater, is that between, on the one hand, the privileges [318]
of its aristocracy and in general the institutions of its positive law
and, on the other, the rights and laws as reconstituted in the
civilized states of the Continent and the principles which, being
grounded on universal reason, cannot always remain so foreign,
even to the English understanding, as they have _been hitherto.
The novi homines who, the Duke of Wellington fears, will worm
their way into the place of the present statesmen may well find in
these principles the strongest supports of their ambition and their
attainment of popularity. In England it is impossible for these
principles to be adopted and carried into effect by the government,
which has hitherto been in the hands of the privileged class. Con­
sequently their advocates would inevitably come on the scene only
as an opposition to the government and the existing order of things;
and the principles themselves would have to appear not in their
practical truth and application, as in Germany, but in the dangerous
form of French abstractions. The antithesis between hommes d'etat
and hommes a principes which appeared in France at the beginning
' Hegel thinks of reforms and codifications of law, abolition of serfdom, grant
of self-go ve rnment to Estates, &c., which took place in Germany after 1789.
These reforms were French-inspired, but they were the work of absolute princes
and their officials and not of repr esentative bodies. See G. P. Gooch, Germany
and the French Revolution (London, 1920), pp. SIS ff.

The English Reform Bill
of the Revolution in just as sharp a form has not yet set foot in
England; but it may well be introduced as a result of opening
a broader way to seats in Parliame nt. The new class may all the
more easily get a footing, since the principles as such are simple
in nature and so can be quickly grasped by the ignorant. Since in
addition, on the strength of their universality, these principles have
a claim to adequacy for everything, they suffice in a man of a cer­
tain slenderness of talent, and a certain energy of character and
ambition, for the requisite all-attacking rhetoric, and they exercise
a blinding effect on the reason of the p1asses who are just as in­
experienced in these matters. On the other hand, the knowledge,
experience , and business routin e of hommes d'etat cannot be so
easily procured, and these qualities are just as necessary for apply­
ing rational principles and introducing them to life as it is lived.
However, the introduction of such a new element would not only
disturb the class whose members have the state's business in their
hands; it is the power of government [319] which would be thrown
off the rails. This power, as has been said, lies in Parliament ; how­
ever much it is divided into parties and however great the passion
with which they confront one another, still equally so little are they
factions. They stand within the same general interest, and hith erto
a change of Ministry has had important consequences rath er in
relation to foreign affairs, to war and peace, than in relation to
domestic affairs. The principle of monarch y, on the other hand,
has little to lose in England. The resignation of Wellington 's
Ministry is well known to have been brought about as a r esult of
the minority in which it found itself on the motion 1 about the
adjustment of the Crown's Ci vil List-an occurrence of special
interest because it affected one of the few things left to the
monarchical principle in England. 2 The remains of the Crown
lands, which yet had the same character of family propert y, the
private property of the royal family, as the properties of families
of dukes, earls, and parons in England, were handed over to the
exchequer in the last century, and in compensation a fixed sum
corresponding to their revenues was set aside in the budg et voted
for other purposes annuall y by the House of Commons. This
1 Actually to refer the Civil List to a committee of the House of Commons.
• Here H egel's pol itical kno wledge and insight fail him. He knew that the
King 's appointment of Minist ers was only formal (see above [314]), but he does
not seem to have kno wn of the convent ions about votes on the Civil List.

The English Reform Bill
landed property, the miserable remains of the earlier great wealth
of the throne which was so seriously diminished by extravagance,
especially through purchasing troops and baronial support in civil
wars, had not been split into what was to remain family property
and what was to be spent for the general purposes of the state.
Now the characteristic of family and private property which be­
longed to one part of that remaining wealth had already been
altered, at least in form, as a result of that property's having changed
from land into a compensating sum included in the annual parlia­
mentary budget. Nevertheless there still remained an appearance
of monarchical influence on this small part of the annual British
expenditure, even though this influence was subject to the Cabinet.
Even this relic of regal control has been abolished by Parliament's
recent decision to separate one part which is set aside under the
King's control for expenditure on himself and his family and to
leave the rest, hitherto already spent on national purposes, to
disposal by Parliament. [320] In this connexion it must not be
overlooked that the majority which was strong enough on a
monarchical matter to bring about the resignation of Wellington's
Ministry 1 was, as is well known, a majority of only one at the second
reading of the Reform Bill2 which is directed against the preroga­
tives of the aristocracy.
What can be regarded as characteristic for the position of the
monarch in the constitution is the reproach cast at the Ministry in
connexion with the Catholic Emancipation Bill as well as in debates
on the Reform Bill, namely that it had allowed the King's partly
given consent to these measures to become public. There was no
question of the exercise of monarchical omnipotence or of a so-called
coup d'etat. What is found improper is only the authority or
influence which a personal remark of the King could exercise. On
the one hand by its action the Ministry vindicate d its delicacy by
avoiding in the management of a Bill the embarrassment of going
contrary to the King's will. But the situation equally clearly implies
that even in the matter of the initiative accruing to the monarchi­
cal element, the throne, Parliament wishes to deal solely with
a Ministry dependent on and incorporated with that element, and
strictly only with its members, since only in that capacity can
' Nov. x83o; a motion for a committee to examine the Civil List was carried
against the government by a majority of 29.
• 22 March I8JI. 302 for, 301 against .

The English Reform Bill
Ministers move a Bill. Thus the right accruing to the King, as the
third branch of the legislative power, of confirming or rejecting
a Bill accepted by both Houses becomes all the more illusory in
that the Cabinet is once again the same Ministry embodied in
Parliament. Earl Grey has said, 1 in reply to that reproach, that the
Ministry's introduction of the Bill did have the King's agreement
in advance, but that the Ministry was exonerated from the blame
of saying outright that the King's agreement had been secured ,
simply by the fact that this statement had not come from Minister s
but from elsewhere. •
Thus the special dissension which might be introduced into
Parliament by the presence of novi homines would not be the strug gle
with which each of the numerous French constitutions began every
time about whether the power of government was actually to be
given to the King and his Ministers, these being those [321] to
whom it was ascribed in words. In the English political administr a­
tion as it exists there has been settled very long ago what in Franc e
has always first needed a decisive and authentic interpretation
through the insurrection and violence of an insurgent people.
Thus the reintroduction of the Reform Bill can only touch the
effective power of government established in Parliament. On the
situation existing hitherto, this power suffers purely superficial
variations appearing as changes of Ministries, and no genuine dis­
sension on principles. A new Ministry belongs itself to the same
class of interests and the same group of statesmen as its predecessor.
The necessary preponderant strength that it needs as a part y it
gains partly through the number of members who count as in­
dependent and who on the whole take the side of the Ministry,
feeling that a government there must be, but also partly through
the influence it may be able to exercise on appointments to a
number of parliamentary seats. Now even if the so-called agricul­
tural interest seems to have declared that it will find its account in
the mode of election which is to be newly introduced, and even if
a great part of the former patronage of parliamentary seats and the
combinations for their purchase retain their position, still there is
no escaping the fact that the class that has hitherto dominated
Parliament, the class that afforded to every Ministry ready-mad e
material for [maintaining) the existing system of social life, will
suffer modification as a result of introducing new men and different
1 28 March I8JI in the House of Lords.

The English Reform Bill
principles. The Reform Bill in itself encroaches on this system,
i.e. on the principle of purely positive rights which secures the
possession of privileges, no matt er what relation , if any, they may
have to the rights of real freedom. When claims of a new kind,
which hitherto have scarcely come to halting and involuntary
expression and have been not so much demanded as vaguely feared,
come to be increasingly discussed in Parliament , the opposition
changes its character: the parties have an object other than that of
getting the Ministry.
If we grasp this hitherto different character of an opposition as it
appears in its extreme in France, it is most distinctiv ely expressed
in [322] the surprise, expressed recently in France at every change
of Ministry, that individuals coming out of opposition into power
now acted on almost the same maxims as their supplanted pre­
decessors. In French opposition newspapers we read naive com­
plaints that so many excellent individuals become backsliders as
a result of their progress through office and become false to the
left to which they belonged earlier, i.e. that, while of course they
had previously granted in abstracto that there had to be a govern­
ment they have now learnt what government really is and that
something more is needed for it than principles. These, as we all
know, consist of general ideas about freedom, equality, the people,
its sovereignty, &c. For men of principles, national legislation is
in essence more or less exhausted by the droits de l' homme et du
citoy en, framed by Lafayette and the model for the earlier French
constitutions . A more fully detailed legislation, an organization of
the powers of the state and the hierarchy of administrative officials,
and the subordination of the people to these public authorities,
was of course accepted as necessary and was drawn up. But instead
of that activity of institutions in which public order and genuine
freedom consists, recourse was had once more to these generalities
which, by what they demand in the way of freedom, make con­
stitutional law self-contradictory from the start. Obedience to law
is granted to be necessary, but when demanded by the authorities,
i.e. by individuals , it is seen to run counter to freedom. The right
to command, the difference arising from this right , the general
difference between commanding and obeying, is contrary to
equalit y. A multitude of men can call itself a 'people', and rightly,
because ' people' is just this ind efinite multitud e; but authorities
and officials, in general the members of the organized power of the

33° The English Reform Bill
state, are different from the 'people', and they are therefore to be
in the wrong; they have forsaken equality and they stand over
against the 'people' which has the infinite advantage of being
recognized as the sovereign will. In the circle of this extreme con­
tradiction a nation revolves once it has been dominated by the se
abstract categories. [323] The members of the English Parliam ent
under the existing system, and Englishmen in general, have a more
practical political sense and they have an idea of what government
and governing is. Yet it also lies in the character of their constitu­
tion that the government as good as does not encroach at all on
the particular circles of social life, on the administration of counti es,
cities, &c., on ecclesiastical and educational establishments , and
even on other public concerns such as road-making. This freer
and more concrete condition of civil life may add to the probabili ty
that abstract principles of freedom will not so soon find in the class
above the lower one (which in England is of course extrem ely
numerous and which in general is most open to these abstractions)
the welcome which the opponents of the Reform Bill represent as
threatening immediately.
But should the Bill, on account of its principle rather than of its
terms, open the way to Parliament, and so into the heart of the
power of government, for principles opposed to the system exist­
ing hitherto, these principles might appear there with greater
influence than radical reformers have been able to gain up till now.
If so, the battle would threaten to be all the more dangerou s, in
that between the interests of positive privilege and the dem ands
for more real freedom there stands no higher mediating power to
restrain and adjust the dispute. In England the monarchical element
in the constitution lacks the power which in other states has earned
gratitude to the Crown for the transition from a legal system based
purely on positive rights to one based on the principles of real
freedom, a transition wholly exempt from earthquake, violence ,
and robbery. The people would be a power of a different kind ; and
an opposition which, erected on a basis hitherto at variance with
the stability of Parliament, might feel itself no match for the
opposite party in Parliament, could be led to look for its strength
to the people, and then introduce not reform but revolution .