Hegel's Philosophy of Right: Morality

 Hegel's Philosophy of Right

 Second Part: Morality

 &sect; 105

The standpoint of morality is the standpoint of the will
which is infinite not merely in itself but for itself
(see § 104 ).
In contrast with the will's implicit being, with its
immediacy and the determinate characteristics developed within
it at that level, this reflection of the will into itself and
its explicit awareness of its identity makes the person into the
subject.

 &sect; 106

It is as subjectivity that the concept has now been determined,
and since subjectivity is distinct from the concept as such, i.e.
from the implicit principle of the will, and since furthermore
it is at the same time the will of the subject as a single individual
aware of himself (i.e. still has immediacy in him), it constitutes
the determinate existence of the concept. In this way a higher
ground has been assigned to freedom; the Idea's existential aspect,
or its moment of reality, is now the subjectivity of the will.
 Only in the Will as subjective can freedom or the implicit principle
of the will be actual.

 Remark:
The second sphere, - Morality , therefore throughout portrays the
real aspect of the concept of freedom, and the movement of this
sphere is as follows: the will, which at the start is aware only
of its independence and which before it is mediated is only implicitly
identical with the universal will or the principle of the will,
is raised beyond its [explicit] difference from the universal
will, beyond this situation in which it sinks deeper and deeper
into itself, and is established as explicitly identical with the
principle of the will., - This process is accordingly the cultivation
of the ground in which freedom is now set, i.e. subjectivity.
 What happens is that subjectivity, which is abstract at the start,
i.e. distinct from the concept, becomes likened to it, and thereby
the Idea acquires its genuine realisation, The result is that
the subjective-will determines itself as objective too and so
as truly concrete.

 Addition: So far as right in the strict sense was concerned, it was of no
importance what my intention or my principle was. This question
about the self-determination and motive of the will, like the
question about its purpose, now enters at this point in connection
with morality. Since man wishes to be judged in accordance with
his own self-determined choices, he is free in this relation to
himself whatever the external situation may impose upon him.
No one can break in upon this inner conviction of mankind, no
violence can be done to it, and the moral will, therefore, is
inaccessible. Man's worth is estimated by reference to his inward
action and hence the standpoint of morality is that of freedom
aware of itself.

 &sect; 107

The self-determination of the will is at the same time
a moment in the concept of the will, and subjectivity is not merely
its existential aspect but its own determinate character (see
 § 104 ).
The will aware of its freedom and determined
as subjective is at the start concept alone, but itself has determinate
existence in order to exist as Idea. The moral standpoint therefore
takes shape as the right of the subjective Will. In accordance with this
right, the will recognises something and is something, only in
so far as the thing is its own and as the will is present to itself
there as something subjective.

The same process through which the moral attitude develops (see
the Remark to the preceding Paragraph) has from this point of
view the form of being the development of the right of the subjective
will, or of the mode of its existence. In this process the subjective
will further determines what it recognises as its own in its object
( Gegenstand ), so that this object becomes the will's
own true concept, becomes objective ( objektiv ) as
the expression of the will's own universality.

 Addition: This entire category of the subjectivity of the will is once again
a whole which, as subjectivity, must also have objectivity. It
is in a subject that freedom can first be realised, since the
subjective is the true material for this realisation. But this
embodiment of the will which we have called subjectivity is different
from the will which has developed all its potentialities to actuality.
 That is to say, the will must free itself from this second one-sidedness
of pure subjectivity in order to become the fully actualised will.
 In morality, it is man's private interest that comes into question,
and the high worth of this interest consists precisely in the
fact that man knows himself as absolute and is self-determined.
 The uneducated man allows himself to be constrained in everything
by brute force and natural factors; children have no moral will
but leave their parents to decide things for them. The educated
man, however, develops an inner life and wills that he himself
shall be in everything he does.

 &sect; 108

The subjective will, directly aware of itself, and distinguished
from the principle of the will (see Remark to § 106 ),
is therefore abstract, restricted, and formal. But not merely
is subjectivity itself formal; in addition, as the infinite self-determination
of the will, it constitutes the form of all willing. In this,
its first appearance in the single will, this form has not yet
been established as identical with the concept of the will, and
therefore the moral point of view is that of relation, of ought-to-be,
or demand. And since the self-difference of subjectivity involves
at the same time the character of being opposed to objectivity
as external fact, it follows that the point of view of consciousness
comes on the scene here too
(see § 8 ). The general
point of view here is that of the will's self-difference, finitude,
and appearance.

 Remark:
The moral is not characterised primarily by its having already
been opposed to the immoral, nor is right directly characterised
by its opposition to wrong. The point is rather that the general
characteristics of morality and immorality alike rest on the subjectivity
of the will.

 Addition: In morality, self-determination is to be thought of as the pure
restlessness and activity which can never arrive at anything that
 is. It is in the sphere of ethical life that the will
is for the first time identical with the concept of the will and
has this concept alone as its content. In the moral sphere the
will still relates itself to its implicit principle and
consequently its position is that of difference. The process
through which this position develops is that whereby the subjective
will becomes identified with its concept. Therefore the ‘ought-to-be'
which is never absent from the moral sphere becomes an ‘is' only
in ethical life. Further, this ‘other' in relation to which the
subjective will stands is two-sided: first, it is what is substantive,
the concept; secondly, it is external fact. Even if the good
were posited in the subjective will, that still would not give
it complete realisation.

 &sect; 109

This form of all willing primarily involves in accordance with its general character (a) the opposition of subjectivity and objectivity, and (b) the activity (see § 8 ) related to this opposition. Now existence and specific determinacy are identical in the concept of the will (see § 104 ), and the will as subjective is itself this concept. Hence the moments of this activity consist more precisely in (a) distinguishing between objectivity and subjectivity and even ascribing independence to them both, and (b) establishing them as identical. In the will which is self-determining,

 [a] its specific determinacy is in the first
place established in the will itself by itself as its inner particularisation,
as a content which it gives to itself. This is the first negation,
and the formal limitation ( Grenze ) of this negation is
that of being only something posited, something subjective.

 [b] As infinitely reflected into itself, this
limitation exists for the will, and the will is the struggle to
transcend this barrier ( Schranke ), i.e. it is the
activity of translating this content in some way or other from
subjectivity into objectivity, into an immediate existence.

 [c] The simple identity of the will with itself
in this opposition is the content which remains self-identical
in both these opposites and indifferent to this formal distinction
of opposition. In short, it is my aim [the purpose willed].

 &sect; 110

But, at the standpoint of morality, where the will is aware of its freedom, of this identity of the will with itself (see § 105 ), this identity of content acquires the more particularised character appropriate to itself.

 (a) The content as ‘mine' has for me this character:
by virtue of its identity in subject and object it enshrines for me my subjectivity, not merely as my inner purpose, but also inasmuch as it has acquired outward existence.

 Addition: The content of the subjective or moral will has a specific character of its own, i.e. even if it has acquired the form of objectivity, it must still continue to enshrine my subjectivity, and my act is to count as mine only if on its inward side it has been determined by me, if it was my purpose, my intention. Beyond what lay in my subjective will I recognise nothing in its expression as mine. What I wish to see in my deed is my subjective consciousness over again.

 &sect; 111

 (b) Though the content does have in it something particular, whencesoever it may be derived, still it is the content of the will reflected into itself in its determinacy and thus of the self-identical and universal will; and therefore:

 [a] the content is inwardly characterised as adequate to the principle of the will or as possessing the objectivity of the concept;

 [b] since the subjective will, as aware of itself, is at the same time still formal (see § 108 ), the content's adequacy to the concept is still only something demanded, and hence this entails the possibility that the content may not be adequate to the concept.

 &sect; 112

 (c) Since in carrying out my aims I retain my subjectivity (see § 110 ), during this process of objectifying them I simultaneously supersede the immediacy of this subjectivity as well as its character as this my individual subjectivity. But the external subjectivity which is thus identical with me is the will of others (see § 73 ). The will's ground of existence is now subjectivity (see § 106 ) and the will of others is that existence which I give to my aim and which is at the same time to me an other. The achievement of my aim, therefore, implies this identity of my will with the will of others, it has a positive bearing on the will of others.

 Remark:
The objectivity of the aim achieved thus involves three meanings, or rather it has three moments present within it at once; it is:

 [a] something existing externally and immediately (see § 106 );

 [b] adequate to the concept (see § 111 );

 [c] universal subjectivity.

The subjectivity which maintains itself in this objectivity consists:

 [a] in the fact that the objective aim is mine, so that in it
I maintain myself as this individual (see § 110 ); [b] and [c] , in moments which coincide with the moments [b] and [c] above.

At the standpoint of morality, subjectivity and objectivity are
distinct from one another, or united only by their mutual contradiction;
it is this fact more particularly which constitutes the finitude
of this sphere or its character as mere appearance (see § 108 ), and the development of this standpoint is the development of these contradictions and their resolutions, resolutions, however, which within this field can be no more than relative.

 Addition:
In dealing with formal right, I said [see § 38 ]
that it contained
prohibitions only, that hence a right action, strictly so called,
was purely negative in character in respect of the will of others.
 In morality, on the other hand, my will has a positive character
in relation to the Will of others, i.e. the universal will is
implicitly present within what the subjective will effects. To
effect something is to produce something or to alter what already
exists, and such changes have a bearing on the will of others.
 The concept of morality is the inner relation of the will to
itself. But here it is not only one will; on the contrary
its objectification implies at the same time the cancellation
of the single will, and therefore, in addition, just because the
character of one-sidedness vanishes, the positing of two wills
and a positive bearing of each on the other. So far as rights
are concerned, it makes no difference whether someone else's will
may do something in relation to mine, when I give my will an embodiment
in property. In morality, however, the welfare of others too
is in question, and this positive bearing cannot come on the scene
before this point.

 &sect; 113

The externalisation of the subjective or moral will is action. Action implies the determinate characteristics here indicated:

 [a] in its externality it must be known to me as my action;

 [b] it must bear essentially on the concept as an ‘ought' [see § 131 ];

 [c] it must have an essential bearing on the will of others.

 Remark:
It is not until we come to the externalisation of the moral will
that we come to action. The existence which the will gives to
itself in the sphere of formal rights is existence in an immediate
thing and is itself immediate; to start with, it neither has in
itself any express bearing on the concept, which is at that point
not yet contrasted with the subjective will and so is not distinguished
from it, nor has it a positive bearing on the will of others;
in the sphere of right, command in its fundamental character is
only prohibition (see § 38 ). In contract and wrong,
there is the beginning of a bearing on the will of others; but
the correspondence established in contract between one will and
another is grounded in arbitrariness, and the essential bearing
which the will has there on the will of the other is, as a matter
of rights, something negative, i.e. one party retains his property
(the value of it) and allows the other to retain his. On the
other hand, crime in its aspect as issuing from the subjective
will, and the question of the mode of its existence in that will,
come before us now for consideration for the first time.

The content of an action at law ( actio ), as something
determined by legal enactment, is not imputable to me. Consequently,
such an action contains only some of the moments of a moral action
proper, and contains them only Incidentally. The aspect of an
action in virtue of which it is properly moral is therefore distinct
from its aspect as legal.

 &sect; 114

The right of the moral will involves three aspects:

 (a) The abstract or formal right of action, the right that the content of the action as carried out in immediate existence, shall be in principle mine, that thus the action shall be the Purpose of the subjective will.

 (b) The particular aspect of the action is its inner content [a] as I am aware of it in its general character; my awareness of this general character constitutes the worth of the action and the reason I think good to do it - in short my Intention . [b] Its content is my special aim, the aim of my particular, merely individual, existence, i.e. Welfare .

 (c) This content (as something which is inward and which yet at the same time is raised to its universality as to absolute objectivity) is the absolute end of the will, the Good - with the opposition in the sphere of reflection, of subjective universality, which is now wickedness and now conscience.

 Addition:
If an action is to be moral, it must in the first place correspond
with my purpose, since the moral will has the right to refuse
to recognise in the resulting state of affairs what was not present
inwardly as purpose. Purpose concerns only the formal principle
that the external will shall be within me as something inward.
 On the other hand, in the second moment of the moral sphere,
questions may be asked about the intention behind the action,
i.e. about the relative worth of the action in relation to me.
 The third and last moment is not the relative worth of the action
but its universal worth, the good.

In a moral action, then, there may be a breach first between what
is purposed and what is really effected and achieved; secondly,
between what is there externally as a universal will and the particular
inner determination which I give to it. The third and last point
is that the intention should be in addition the universal content
of the action. The good is the intention raised to be the concept
of the will.

 i Purpose & Responsibility

 &sect; 115

The finitude of the subjective will in the immediacy of acting
consists directly in this, that its action presupposes an
external object with a complex environment. The deed sets up
an alteration in this state of affairs confronting the will, and
my will has responsibility in general for its deed in so far as
the abstract predicate ‘mine' belongs to the state of affairs
so altered.

 Remark:
An event, a situation which has been produced, is a concrete external
actuality which because of its concreteness has in it an indeterminable
multiplicity of factors. Any and every single element which appears
as the condition, ground, or cause of one such factor, and so
has contributed its share to the event in question, may be looked
upon as responsible for the event, or at least as sharing the
responsibility for it. Hence, in the case of a complex event
(e.g. the French Revolution) it is open to the abstract Understanding
to choose which of an endless number of factors it will maintain
to be responsible for it.

 Addition: I am chargeable with what lay in my purpose and this is the most
important point in connection with crime. But responsibility
contains only the quite external judgement whether I have or have
not done some thing. It does not follow that, because I am responsible,
the thing done may be imputed to me.

 &sect; 116.

It is, of course, not my own doing if damage is caused to others
by things whose owner I am and which as external objects stand
and are effective in manifold connections with other things (as
may also be the case with my self as a bodily mechanism or as
a living thing). This damage, however, is to some extent chargeable
to me because the things that cause it are in principle mine,
although it is true that they are subject to my control, vigilance,
&c., only to an extent varying with their special character.

 &sect; 117

The freely acting will, in directing its aim on the state of affairs
confronting it, has an idea of the attendant circumstances. But
because the will is finite, since this state of affairs is presupposed,
the objective phenomenon is contingent so far as the will is concerned,
and may contain something other than what the will's idea of it
contains. The will's right, however, is to recognise as its action,
and to accept responsibility for, only those presuppositions of
the deed of which it was conscious in its aim and those aspects
of the deed which were contained in its purpose. The deed can
be imputed to me only if my will is responsible for it - this
is the right to know.

 Addition:
The will has confronting it a state of affairs upon which it acts.
 But in order to know what this state of affairs is I must have
an idea of it, and the responsibility is truly mine only in so
far as I had knowledge of the situation confronting me. Such
a situation is a presupposition of my volition and my will is
therefore finite, or rather, since my will is finite, it has a
presupposition of this kind. As soon as my thinking and willing
is rational, I am no longer at this level of finitude, since the
object on which I act is no longer an ‘other' to me. Finitude,
however, implies fixed limits and restrictions. I have confronting
me an ‘other' which is only contingent, something necessary in
a purely external way; its path and mine may meet or diverge.
 Nevertheless, I am nothing except in relation to my freedom,
and my will is responsible for the deed only in so far as I know
what I am doing. Oedipus, who killed his father without knowing
it, cannot be accused of parricide. The ancient penal codes,
however, attached less weight to the subjective side of action,
to imputability, than we do nowadays. That is why sanctuaries
were instituted in ancient times for harbouring and protecting
the fugitive from vengeance.

 &sect; 118

Further, action is translated into external fact, and external
fact has connections in the field of external necessity through
which it develops itself in all directions. Hence action has
a multitude of consequences. These consequences are the outward
form whose inner soul is the aim of the action, and thus they
are the consequences of the action, they belong to the
action. At the same time, however, the action, as the aim posited
in the external world, has become the prey of external forces
which attach to it something totally different from what it is
explicitly and drive it on into alien and distant consequences.
 Thus the will has the right to repudiate the imputation of all
consequences except the first, since it alone was purposed.

 Remark:
To determine which results are accidental and which necessary
is impossible, because the necessity implicit in the finite comes
into determinate existence as an external necessity, as a relation
of single things to one another, things which as self-subsistent
are conjoined in indifference to one another and externally.
The maxim: ‘Ignore the consequences of actions' and the other:
‘Judge actions by their consequences and make these the criterion
of right and good' are both alike maxims of the abstract Understanding.
 The consequences, as the shape proper to the action and immanent
within it, exhibit nothing but its nature and are simply the action
itself; therefore the action can neither disavow nor ignore them.
 On the other hand, however, among the consequences there is also
comprised something interposed from without and introduced by
chance, and this is quite unrelated to the nature of the action
itself.

The development in the external world of the contradiction involved
in the necessity of the finite is just the conversion
of necessity into contingency and vice versa. From this point
of view, therefore, acting means surrendering oneself to this
law. It is because of this that it is to the advantage of the
criminal if his action has comparatively few bad consequences
(while a good action must be content to have had no consequences
or very few), and that the full developed consequences of a crime
are counted as part of the crime.

The self-consciousness of heroes (like that of Oedipus and others
in Greek tragedy) had not advanced out of its primitive simplicity
either to reflection on the distinction between act and action,
between the external event and the purpose and knowledge of the
circumstances, or to the subdivision of consequences. On the
contrary, they accepted responsibility for the whole compass of
the deed.

 Addition:
The transition to intention depends on the fact that I accept
responsibility only for what my idea of the situation was. That
is to say, there can be imputed to me only what I knew of the
circumstances. On the other hand, there are inevitable consequences
linked with every action, even if I am only bringing about some
single, immediate, state of affairs. The consequences in such
a case represent the universal implicit within that state of affairs.
 Of course I cannot foresee the consequences - they might be preventable
 - but I must be aware of the universal character of any isolated
act. The important point here is not the isolated thing but the
whole, and that depends not on the differentia of the particular
action, but on its universal nature. Now the transition from
purpose to intention lies in the fact that I ought to be aware
not simply of my single action but also of the universal which
is conjoined with it. The universal which comes on the scene
here in this way is what I have willed, my intention.

 ii Intention & Welfare

 § 119

An action as an external event. is a complex of connected parts
which may be regarded as divided into units ad infinitum,
 and the action may be treated as having touched in the first
instance only one of these units. The truth of the single, however,
is the universal; and what explicitly gives action its specific
character is not an isolated content limited to an external unit,
but a universal content, comprising in itself the complex of connected
parts. Purpose, as issuing from a thinker, comprises more than
the mere unit; essentially it comprises that universal side of
the action, i.e. the intention.

 Remark:
Etymologically, Absicht (intention) implies abstraction,
either the form of universality or the extraction of a particular
aspect of the concrete thing. The endeavour to justify an action
by the intention behind it involves the isolation of one or other
of its single aspects which is alleged to be the essence of the
action on its subjective side.

To judge an action as an external deed without yet determining
its rightness or wrongness is simply to bestow on it a universal
predicate, i.e. to describe it as burning, killing, &c.

The discrete character of the external world shows what the nature
of that world is, namely a chain of external relations. Actuality
is touched in the first instance only at a single point (arson,
for instance, directly concerns only a tiny section of
the firewood, i.e. is describable in a proposition, not a judgment),
but the universal nature of this point entails its expansion.
 In a living thing, the single part is there in its immediacy
not as a mere part, but as an organ in which the universal is
really present as the universal; hence in murder, it is not a
piece of flesh, as something isolated, which is injured, but life
itself which is injured in that piece of flesh. It is subjective
reflection, ignorant of the logical nature of the single and the
universal, which indulges ad libitum in the subdivision
of single parts and consequences; and yet it is the nature of
the finite deed itself to contain such separable contingencies.
The device of dolus indirectus has its basis in these considerations.

 Addition:
It happens of course that circumstances may make an action miscarry
to a greater or lesser degree. In a case of arson, for instance,
the fire may not catch or alternatively it may take hold further
than the incendiary intended. In spite of this, however, we must
not make this a distinction between good and bad luck, since in
acting a man must lay his account with externality. The old Proverb
is correct: ‘A flung stone is the devil's.' To act is to expose
oneself to bad luck. Thus bad luck has a right over me and is
an embodiment of my own willing.

 &sect; 120

The right of intention is that the universal quality of the action
shall not merely be implicit but shall be known by the agent,
and so shall have lain from the start in his subjective will.
 Vice versa, what may be called the right of the objectivity of
action is the right of the action to evince itself as known and
willed by the subject as a thinker.

 Remark:
This right to insight of this kind entails the complete, or almost
complete, irresponsibility of children, imbeciles, lunatics, &c.,
for their actions. But just as actions on their external side
as events include accidental consequences, so there is involved
in the subjective agent an indeterminacy whose degree depends
on the strength and force of his self-consciousness and circumspection.
 This indeterminacy, however, may not be taken into account except
in connection with childhood or imbecility, lunacy, &c., since
it is only such well marked states of mind that nullify the trait
of thought and freedom of will, and permit us to treat the agent
as devoid of the dignity of being a thinker and a will.

 &sect; 121

The universal quality of the action is the manifold content of
the action as such, reduced to the simple form of universality.
 But the subject, an entity reflected into himself and so particular
in correlation with the particularity of his object, has in his
end his own particular content, and this content is the soul of
the action and determines its character. The fact that this moment
of the particularity of the agent is contained and realised in
the action constitutes subjective freedom in its more concrete
sense, the right of the subject to find his satisfaction in the
action.

 Addition:
In my own eyes, reflected into myself, I am a particular in correlation
with the externality of my action. My end constitutes the content
of the action, the content determinant of the action. Murder
and arson, for example, are universals and so are not the positive
content of my action qua the action of a subject. If one
of these crimes has been committed, its perpetrator may be asked
why he committed it. The murder was not done for the sake of
murdering; the murderer had in view some particular positive end.
 But if we were to say that he murdered for the mere pleasure
of murdering, then the purely positive content of the subject
would surely be pleasure, and if that is the case then the deed
is the satisfaction of the subject's will. Thus the motive of
an act is, more particularly, what is called the ‘moral' factor,
and this has in that case the double meaning of the universal
 implicit in the purpose and the particular aspect of
the intention. It is a striking modem innovation to inquire continually
about the motives of men's actions. Formerly, the question was
simply: ‘Is he an honest man? Does he do his duty?' Nowadays
we insist on looking into men's hearts and so we presuppose a
gulf between the objectivity of actions and their inner side,
the subjective motives. To be sure, the subject's volition must
be considered; he wills something and the reason for what he wills
lies within himself; he wills the satisfaction of his desire,
the gratification of his passion. None the less, the good and
the right are also a content of action, a content not purely natural
but put there by my rationality. To make my freedom the content
of what I will is a plain goal of my freedom itself. Therefore
it is to take higher moral ground to find satisfaction in the
action and to advance beyond the gulf between the self-consciousness
of a man and the objectivity of his deed, even though to treat
action as if it involved such a gulf is a way of looking at the
matter characteristic of certain epochs in world history and in
individual biography.

 &sect; 122

It is on the strength of this particular aspect that the action
has subjective worth or interest for me. In contrast with this
 end - the content of the intention - the direct character
of the action in its further content is reduced to a means.
 In so far as such an end is something finite, it may in its
turn be reduced to a means to some further intention and so on
 ad infinitum.

 &sect; 123

For the content of these ends nothing is available at this point
except [a] pure activity itself, i.e. the activity present owing
to the fact that the subject puts himself into whatever he is
to look upon and promote as his end. Men are willing to be active
 in pursuit of what interests them, or should interest them,
as something which is their own. [b] A more determinate
content, however, the still abstract and formal freedom of subjectivity
possesses only in its natural, subjective embodiment, i.e. in
needs, inclinations, passions, opinions, fancies, &c. The
satisfaction of these is welfare or happiness, both in general
and in its particular species - the ends of the whole sphere of
finitude.

 Remark:
Here - the standpoint of relation (see § 108 ), when
the subject is characterised by his self-difference and so counts
as a particular - is the place where the content of the natural
will (see § 11 ). comes on the scene. But the will
here is not as it is in its immediacy; on the contrary, this content
now belongs to a will reflected into itself and so is elevated
to become a universal end, the end of welfare or happiness; this
happens at the level of the thinking which does not yet apprehend
the will in its freedom but reflects on its content as on one
natural and given - the level, for example, of the time of Croesus
and Solon.

 Addition:
Since the specifications of happiness are given, they are
not true specifications of freedom, because freedom is not genuinely
free in its own eyes except in the good, i.e. except when it is
its own end. Consequently we may raise the question whether a
man has the right to set before himself ends not freely chosen
but resting solely on the fact that the subject is a living being.
 The fact that man is a living being, however, is not fortuitous,
but in conformity with reason, and to that extent he has a right
to make his needs his end. There is nothing degrading in being
alive, and there is no mode of intelligent being higher than life
in which existence would be possible. It is only the raising
of the given to something self-created which yields the higher
orbit of the good, although this distinction implies no incompatibility
between the two levels.

 &sect; 124

Since the subjective satisfaction of the individual himself (including
the recognition which he receives by way of honour and fame)
is also part and parcel of the achievement of ends of absolute
worth, it follows that the demand that such an end alone shall
appear as willed and attained, like the view that, in willing,
objective and subjective ends are mutually exclusive, is an empty
dogmatism of the abstract Understanding. And this dogmatism is
more than empty, it is pernicious if it passes into the assertion
that because subjective satisfaction is present, as it always
is when any task is brought to completion, it is what the agent
intended in essence to secure and that the objective end was
in his eyes only a means to that. - What the subject is, is the
series of his actions. If these are a series of worthless productions,
then the subjectivity of his willing is just as worthless. But
if the series of his deeds is of a substantive nature, then the
same is true also of the individual's inner will.

 Remark:
The right of the subject's particularity, his right to be satisfied,
or in other words the right of subjective freedom, is the pivot
and centre of the difference between antiquity and modern times.
 This right in its infinity is given expression in Christianity
and it has become the universal effective principle of a new form
of civilisation. Amongst the primary shapes which this right
assumes are love, romanticism, the quest for the eternal salvation
of the individual, &c.; next come moral convictions and conscience;
and, finally, the other forms, some of which come into prominence
in what follows as the principle of civil society and as moments
in the constitution of the state, while others appear in the course
of history, particularly the history of art, science, and philosophy.

Now this principle of particularity is, to be sure, one moment
of the antithesis, and in the first place at least it is just
as much identical with the universal as distinct from it. Abstract
reflection, however, fixes this moment in its distinction from
and opposition to the universal and so produces a view of morality
as nothing but a bitter, unending, struggle against self-satisfaction,
as the command: ‘Do with abhorrence what duty enjoins.'

It is just this type of ratiocination which adduces that familiar
psychological view of history which understands how to belittle
and disparage all great deeds and great men by transforming into
the main intention and operative motive of actions the inclinations
and passions which likewise found their satisfaction from the
achievement of something substantive, the fame and honour, &c.,
consequential on such actions, in a word their particular aspect,
the aspect which it has decreed in advance to be something in
itself pernicious. Such ratiocination assures us that, while
great actions and the efficiency which has subsisted through a
series of them have produced greatness in the world and have had
as their consequences for the individual agent power, honour,
and fame, still what belongs to the individual is not the greatness
itself but what has accrued to him from it, this purely particular
and external result; because this result is a consequence, it
is therefore supposed to have been the agent's end and even his
sole end. Reflection of this sort stops short at the subjective
side of great men, since it itself stands on purely subjective
ground, and consequently it overlooks what is substantive in this
emptiness of its own making. This is the view of those valet
psychologists ‘for whom there are no heroes, not because there
are no heroes, but because these psychologists are only valets'.

 Addition:
 In magnis ... voluisse sat est [In great things
to have willed is enough] is right in the sense that we ought
to will something great. But we must also be able to achieve
it, otherwise the willing is nugatory. The laurels of mere willing
are dry leaves that never were green.

 &sect; 125

The subjective element of the will, with its particular content
 - welfare, is reflected into itself and infinite and so stands
related to the universal element, to the principle of the will.
 This moment of universality, posited first of all within this
particular content itself, is the welfare of others also, or,
specified completely, though quite emptily, the welfare of all.
 The welfare of many other unspecified particulars is thus also
an essential end and right of subjectivity. But since the absolutely
universal, in distinction from such a particular content, has
not so far been further determined than as ‘the right', it follows
that these ends of particularity, differing as they do from the
universal, may be in conformity with it, but they also may not.

 &sect; 126

My particularity, however, like that of others, is only a right
at all in so far as I am a free entity. Therefore it may not
make claims for itself in contradiction to this its substantive
basis, and an intention to secure my welfare or that of others
(and it is particularly in this latter case that such an intention
is called ‘moral') cannot justify an action which is wrong.

 Remark:
It is one of the most prominent of the corrupt maxims of our time
to enter a plea for the so-called ‘moral' intention behind wrong
actions and to imagine bad men with well-meaning hearts, i.e.
hearts willing their own welfare and perhaps that of others also.
 This doctrine is rooted in the ‘benevolence' ( guten Herzens )
of the pre-Kantian philosophers and constitutes, e.g., the
quintessence of well-known touching dramatic productions; but
today it has been resuscitated in a more extravagant form, and
inner enthusiasm and the heart, i.e. the form of particularity
as such, have been made the criterion of right, rationality, and
excellence. The result is that crime and the thoughts that lead
to it, be they fancies however trite and empty, or opinions however
wild, are to be regarded as right, rational, and excellent, simply
because they issue from men's hearts and enthusiasms. (See the
 Remark to § 140 , where more details are given.)
Incidentally, however, attention must be paid to the point of
view from which right and welfare are being treated here. We
are considering right as abstract right and welfare as the particular
welfare of the single agent. The so-called ‘general good', the
welfare of the state, i.e. the right of mind actual and concrete,
is quite a different sphere, a sphere in which abstract right
is a subordinate moment like particular welfare and the happiness
of the individual. As was remarked above, it is one of the commonest
blunders of abstract thinking to make private rights and private
welfare count as absolute in opposition to the universality
of the state.

 Addition:
The famous answer: Je n'en vois pas la n&eacute;cessit&eacute;,
 given [by Richelieu] to the lampooner who excused himself
with the words: Il faut donc que je vive, is apposite at
this point. Life ceases to be necessary in face of the higher
realm of freedom. When St. Crispin stole leather to make shoes
for the poor, his action was moral but wrong and so inadmissible.

 &sect; 127

The particularity of the interests of the natural will, taken
in their entirety as a single whole, is personal existence or
life. In extreme danger and in conflict with the rightful property
of someone else, this life may claim (as a right, not a mercy)
a right of distress, because in such a situation there is on the
one hand an infinite injury to a man's existence and the consequent
loss of rights altogether, and on the other hand only an injury
to a single restricted embodiment of freedom, and this implies
a recognition both of right as such and also of the injured man's
capacity for rights, because the injury affects only this property
of his.

 Remark:
The right of distress is the basis of beneficium competentiae
 whereby a debtor is allowed to retain of his tools, farming implements,
clothes, or, in short, of his resources, i.e. of his creditor's
property, so much as is regarded as indispensable if he is to
continue to support life - to support it, of course, on his own
social level.

 Addition:
Life as the sum of ends has a right against abstract right. If
for example it is only by stealing bread that the wolf can be
kept from the door, the action is of course an encroachment on
someone's property, but it would be wrong to treat this action
as an ordinary theft. To refuse to allow a man in jeopardy of
his life to take such steps for self-preservation would be to
stigmatise him as without rights, and since he would be deprived
of his life, his freedom would be annulled altogether. Many diverse
details have a bearing on the preservation of life, and when we
have our eyes on the future we have to engage ourselves in these
details. But the only thing that is necessary is to live now,
the future is not absolute but ever exposed to accident. Hence
it is only the necessity of the immediate present which can justify
a wrong action, because not to do the action would in turn be
to commit an offence, indeed the most wrong of all offences, namely the complete destruction
of the embodiment of freedom. Beneficium competentiae is
relevant here, because kinship and other close relationships imply
the right to demand that no one shall be sacrificed altogether
on the altar of right.

 &sect; 128

This distress reveals the finitude and therefore the contingency of both right and welfare of right as the abstract embodiment of freedom without embodying the particular person, and of welfare as the sphere of the particular will without the universality of right. In this way they are established as one-sided and ideal, the character which in conception they already possessed. Right has already (see § 106 ) determined its embodiment as the particular will; and subjectivity, in its particularity as a comprehensive whole, is itself the embodiment of freedom (see § 127 ), while as the infinite relation of the will to itself, it is implicitly the universal element in freedom. The two moments present in right and subjectivity, thus integrated and attaining their truth, their identity, though in the first instance still remaining relative to one another, are (a) the good (as the concrete, absolutely determinate, universal), and (b) conscience (as infinite subjectivity inwardly conscious and inwardly determining its content).

 iii Good & Conscience

 &sect; 129

The good is the Idea as the unity of the concept of the will with
the particular will. In this unity, abstract right, welfare,
the subjectivity of knowing and the contingency of external fact,
have their independent self-subsistence superseded, though at
the same time they are still contained and retained within it
in their essence. The good is thus freedom realised, the absolute
end and aim of the world.

 Addition:
Every stage is really the Idea, but the earlier stages contain
it only in rather an abstract form. Thus for example, even the
ego, as personality, is already the Idea, though in its most abstract
shape. The good, therefore, is the Idea further determined, the
unity of the concept of the will with the particular will. It
is not something abstractly right, but something concrete whose
contents are made up of both right and welfare alike.

 &sect; 130

In this Idea, welfare has no independent validity as the embodiment
of a single particular will but only as universal welfare and
essentially as universal in principle, i.e. as according with
freedom. Welfare without right is not a good. Similarly, right
without welfare is not the good; fiat justitia [Let justice be done ...] should not
be followed by pereat mundus [... though the world perish] . Consequently, since the
good must of necessity be actualised through the particular will
and is at the same time its substance, it has absolute right in
contrast with the abstract right of property and the particular
aims of welfare. If either of these moments becomes distinguished
from the good, it has validity only in so far as it accords with
the good and is subordinated to it.

 &sect; 131

For the subjective will, the good and the good alone is the essential, and the subjective will has value and dignity only in so far as its insight and intention accord with the good. Inasmuch as the good is at this point still only this abstract Idea of good, the subjective will has not yet been caught up into it and established as according with it. Consequently, it stands in a relation to the good, and the relation is that the good ought to be substantive for it, i.e. it ought to make the good its aim and realise it completely, while the good on its side has in the subjective will its only means of stepping into actuality.

 Addition:
The good is the truth of the particular will, but the will is
only that into which it puts itself; it is not good by nature
but can become what it is only by its own labour. On the other
hand, the good itself, apart from the subjective will, is only
an abstraction without that real existence which it is to acquire
for the first time through the efforts of that will. Accordingly,
the development of the good has three stages: (i) The good should
present itself to my volition as a particular will and I should
know it. (ii) I should myself say what is good and should develop
its particular specifications. (iii) Finally, the specification
of the good on its own account, the particularisation of the good
as infinite subjectivity aware of itself. This inward specifying
of what good is, is conscience.

 &sect; 132

The right of the subjective will is that whatever it is to recognise as valid shall be seen by it as good, and that an action, as its aim entering upon external objectivity, shall be imputed to it as right or wrong, good or evil, legal or illegal, in accordance with its knowledge of the worth which the action has in this objectivity.

 Remark:
The good is in principle the essence of the will in its substantiality
and universality, i.e. of the will in its truth, and therefore
it exists simply and solely in thinking and by means of thinking.
 Hence assertions such as ‘man cannot know the truth but has to
do only with phenomena', or ‘thinking injures the good will' are
dogmas depriving mind not only of intellectual but also of all
ethical worth and dignity.

The right of giving recognition only to what my insight sees as
rational is the highest right of the subject, although owing to
its subjective character it remains a formal right; against it
the right which reason qua the objective possesses over the subject
remains firmly established.

On account of its formal character, insight is capable equally
of being true and of being mere opinion and error. The individual's
acquisition of this right of insight is, on the principles of
the sphere which is still moral only, part and parcel of his particular
subjective education. I may demand from myself, and regard it
as one of my subjective rights, that my insight into an obligation
shall be based on good reasons, that I shall be convinced of the
obligation and even that I shall apprehend it from its concept
and fundamental nature. But whatever I may claim for the satisfaction
of my conviction about the character of an action as good, permitted,
or forbidden, and so about its imputability in respect of this
character, this in no way detracts from the right of objectivity.

This right of insight into the good is distinct from the right
of insight in respect of action as such
(see § 117 ); the form of the right
of objectivity which corresponds to the
latter is this, that since action is an alteration which is to
take place in an actual world and so will have recognition in
it, it must in general accord with what has validity there. Whoever
wills to act in this world of actuality has eo ipso submitted
himself to its laws and recognised the right of objectivity.

Similarly, in the state as the objectivity of the concept of reason,
legal responsibility cannot be tied down to what an individual
may hold to be or not to be in accordance with his reason, or
to his subjective insight into what is right or wrong, good or
evil, or to the demands which he makes for the satisfaction of
his conviction. In this objective field, the right of insight
is valid as insight into the legal or illegal, qua into
what is recognised as right, and it is restricted to its elementary
meaning, i.e. to knowledge in the sense of acquaintance with what
is legal and to that extent obligatory. By means of the publicity
of the laws and the universality of manners, the state removes
from the right of insight its formal aspect and the contingency
which it still retains for the subject at the level of morality.
 The subject's right to know action in its specific character
as good or evil, legal or illegal, has the result of diminishing
or cancelling in this respect too the responsibility of children,
imbeciles, and lunatics, although it is impossible to delimit
precisely either childhood, imbecility, &c., or their degree
of irresponsibility. But to turn momentary blindness, the goad
of passion, intoxication, or, in a word, what is called the strength
of sensual impulse (excluding impulses which are the basis of
the right of distress - see § 127 ) into reasons
 when the imputation, specific character, and culpability of
a crime are in question, and to look upon such circumstances
as if they took away the criminal's guilt, again means (compare
 § 100 and the
 Remark to § 120 ) failing
to treat the criminal. in accordance with the right and honour
due to him as a man; for the nature of man consists precisely
in the fact that he is essentially something universal, not a
being whose knowledge is an abstractly momentary and piecemeal
affair.

Just as what the incendiary really sets on fire is not the isolated
square inch of wooden surface to which he applies his torch, but
the universal in that square inch, e.g. the house as a whole,
so, as subject, he is neither the single existent of this moment
of time nor this isolated hot feeling of revenge. If he were,
he would be an animal which would have to be knocked on the head
as dangerous and unsafe because of its liability to fits of madness.

The claim is made that the criminal in the moment of his action
must have had a ‘clear idea' of the wrong and its culpability
before it can be imputed to him as a crime. At first sight, this
claim seems to preserve the right of his subjectivity, but the
truth is that it deprives him of his indwelling nature as intelligent,
a nature whose effective presence is not confined to the ‘clear
ideas' of Wolff's psychology, and only in cases of lunacy is it
so deranged as to be divorced from the knowing and doing of isolated
things.

The sphere in which these extenuating circumstances come into
consideration as grounds for the mitigation of punishment is a
sphere other than that of rights, the sphere of pardon.

 &sect; 133

The particular subject is related to the good as to the essence
of his will, and hence his will's obligation arises directly in
this relation. Since particularity is distinct from the good
and falls within the subjective will, the good is characterised
to begin with only as the universal abstract essentiality of the
will, i.e. as duty. Since duty is thus abstract and universal
in character, it should be done for duty's sake.

 Addition:
From my point of view the essence of the will is duty. Now
if my knowledge stops at the fact that the good is my duty, I
am still going no further than the abstract character of duty.
 I should do my duty for duty's sake, and when I do my duty it
is in a true sense my own objectivity which I am bringing to realisation.
 In doing my duty, I am by myself and free. To have emphasised
this meaning of duty has constituted the merit of Kant's moral
philosophy and its loftiness of outlook.

 &sect; 134

Because every action explicitly calls for a particular content
and a specific end, while duty as an abstraction entails nothing
of the kind, the question arises: what is my duty? As an answer
nothing is so far available except: (a) to do the right, and (b) to strive after welfare, one's own welfare, and welfare in
universal terms, the welfare of others (see § 119 ).

 Addition:
This is the same question as was put to Jesus when someone wished
to learn from him what he should do to inherit eternal life. Good
as a universal is abstract and cannot be accomplished so long
as it remains abstract. To be accomplished it must acquire in
addition the character of particularity.

 &sect; 135

These specific duties, however, are not contained in the definition
of duty itself; but since both of them are conditioned and restricted,
they eo ipso bring about the transition to the higher sphere
of the unconditioned, the sphere of duty. Duty itself in the
moral self-consciousness is the essence or the universality of
that consciousness, the way in which it is inwardly related to
itself alone; all that is left to it, therefore, is abstract universality,
and for its determinate character it has identity without content,
or the abstractly positive, the indeterminate.

 Remark:
However essential it is to give prominence to the pure unconditioned
self-determination of the will as the root of duty, and to the
way in which knowledge of the will, thanks to Kant's philosophy,
has won its firm foundation and starting-point for the first time
owing to the thought of its infinite autonomy, still to adhere
to the exclusively moral position, without making the transition
to the conception of ethics, is to reduce this gain to an empty
formalism, and the science of morals to the preaching of duty
for duty's sake. From this point of view, no immanent doctrine
of duties is possible; of course, material may be brought in from
outside and particular duties may be arrived at accordingly, but
if the definition of duty is taken to be the absence of contradiction,
formal correspondence with itself - which is nothing but abstract
indeterminacy stabilised - then no transition is possible to the
specification of particular duties nor, if some such particular
content for acting comes under consideration, is there any criterion
in that principle for deciding whether it is or is not a duty.
 On the contrary, by this means any wrong or immoral line of conduct
may be justified.

Kant's further formulation, the possibility of visualising an
action as a universal maxim, does lead to the more concrete
visualisation of a situation, but in itself it contains no principle
beyond abstract identity and the ‘absence of contradiction' already
mentioned.

The absence of property contains in itself just as little contradiction
as the non-existence of this or that nation, family, &c.,
or the death of the whole human race. But if it is already established
on other grounds and presupposed that property and human life
are to exist and be respected, then indeed it is a contradiction
to commit theft or murder; a contradiction must be a contradiction
of something, i.e. of some content presupposed from the start
as a fixed principle. It is to a principle of that kind alone,
therefore, that an action can be related either by correspondence
or contradiction. But if duty is to be willed simply for duty's
sake and not for the sake of some content, it is only a formal
identity whose nature it is to exclude all content and specification.

The further antinomies and configurations of this never-ending
ought-to-be, in which the exclusively moral way of thinking -
thinking in terms of relation - just wanders to and fro
without being able to resolve them and get beyond the ought-to-be,
I have developed in my Phenomenology of Mind .

 Addition:
While we laid emphasis above on the fact that the outlook of Kant's
philosophy is a high one in that it propounds a correspondence
between duty and rationality, still we must notice here that this
point of view is defective in lacking all articulation. The proposition:
‘ Act as if the maxim of thine action could be laid down as a universal principle ', would be admirable if we already had determinate principles
of conduct. That is to say, to demand of a principle that it
shall be able to serve in addition as a determinant of universal
legislation is to presuppose that it already possesses a content.
 Given the content, then of course the application of the principle
would be a simple matter. In Kant's case, however, the principle
itself is still not available and his criterion of non-contradiction
is productive of nothing, since where there is nothing, there
can be no contradiction either.

 &sect; 136

Because of the abstract characterisation of the good, the other
moment of the Idea - particularity in general - falls within subjectivity.
 Subjectivity in its universality reflected into itself is the
subject's absolute inward certainty ( Gewissheit ) of
himself, that which establishes the particular and is the determining
and decisive element in him, his conscience ( Gewissen ).

 Addition:
We may speak in a very lofty strain about duty, and talk of the
kind is uplifting and broadens human sympathies, but if it never
comes to anything specific it ends in being wearisome. Mind demands
particularity and is entitled to it. But conscience is this deepest
inward solitude with oneself where everything external and every
restriction has disappeared - this complete withdrawal into oneself.
 As conscience, man is no longer shackled by the aims of particularity,
and consequently in attaining that position he has risen to higher
ground, the ground of the modern world, which for the first time
has reached this consciousness, reached this sinking into oneself.
 The more sensuous consciousness [For the distinction between
sense-consciousness and ‘more highly developed types of consciousness',
see Remarks to §§ 21 and 35.] of earlier epochs had
something external and given confronting it, either religion or
law. But conscience knows itself as thinking and knows that what
alone has obligatory force for me is this that I think.

 &sect; 137

True conscience is the disposition to will what is absolutely
good. It therefore has fixed principles and it is aware of these
as its explicitly objective determinants and duties. In distinction
from this its content (i.e. truth), conscience is only the formal
side of the activity of the will, which as this will has
no special content of its own. But the objective system of these
principles and duties, and the union of subjective knowing with
this system, is not present until we come to the standpoint of
ethical life. Here at the abstract standpoint of morality, conscience
lacks this objective content and so its explicit character is
that of infinite abstract self-certainty, which at the same time
is for this very reason the self-certainty of this subject.

 Remark:
Conscience is the expression of the absolute title of subjective
self-consciousness to know in itself and from within itself what
is right and obligatory, to give recognition only to what it thus
knows as good, and at the same time to maintain that whatever
in this way it knows and wills is in truth right and obligatory.
 Conscience as this unity of subjective knowing with what is absolute
is a sanctuary which it would be sacrilege to violate. But whether
the conscience of a specific individual corresponds with this
Idea of conscience, or whether what it takes or declares to be
good is actually so, is ascertainable only from the content of
the good it seeks to realise. What is right and obligatory is
the absolutely rational element in the will's volitions and therefore
it is not in essence the particular property of an individual,
and its form is not that of feeling or any other private (i.e.
sensuous) type of knowing, but essentially that of universals
determined by thought, i.e. the form of laws and principles.
Conscience is therefore subject to the judgement of its truth
or falsity, and when it appeals only to itself for a decision,
it is directly at variance with what it wishes to be, namely the
rule for a mode of conduct which is rational, absolutely valid,
and universal. For this reason, the state cannot give recognition
to conscience in its private form as subjective knowing, any more
than science can grant validity to subjective opinion, dogmatism,
and the appeal to a subjective opinion. In true conscience, its
elements are not different, but they may become so, and it is
the determining element, the subjectivity of willing and knowing,
which can sever itself from the true content of conscience, establish
its own independence, and reduce that content to a form and a
show. The ambiguity in connection with conscience lies therefore
in this: it is presupposed to mean the identity of subjective
knowing and willing with the true good, and so is claimed and
recognised to be something sacrosanct; and yet at the same time,
as the mere subjective reflection of self-consciousness into itself,
it still claims for itself the title due, solely on the strength
of its absolutely valid rational content, to that identity
alone.

At the level of morality, distinguished as it is in this book
from the level of ethics, it is only formal conscience that is
to be found. True conscience has been mentioned only to indicate
its distinction from the other and to obviate the possible misunderstanding
that here, where it is only formal conscience that is under consideration,
the argument is about true conscience. The latter is part of
the ethical disposition which comes before us for the first time
in the following section. The religious conscience, however,
does not belong to this sphere at all.

 Addition:
When we speak of conscience, it may easily be thought that, in
virtue of its form, which is abstract inwardness, conscience is
at this point without more ado true conscience. But true conscience
determines itself to will what is absolutely good and obligatory
and is this self-determination. So far, however, it is only with
good in the abstract that we have to do and conscience is still
without this objective content and is but the infinite certainty
of oneself.

 &sect; 138

This subjectivity, qua abstract self-determination and pure certainty of oneself alone, as readily evaporates into itself the whole determinate character of right, duty, and existence, as it remains both the power to judge, to determine from within itself alone, what is good in respect of any content, and also the power to which the good, at first only an ideal and an ought-to-be, owes its actuality.

 Remark:
The self-consciousness which has attained this absolute reflection
into itself knows itself in this reflection to be the kind of
consciousness which is and should be beyond the reach of every
existent and given specific determination. As one of the commoner
features of history (e.g. in Socrates, the Stoics, and others),
the tendency to look deeper into oneself and to know and determine
from within oneself what is right and good appears in ages when
what is recognised as right and good in contemporary manners cannot
satisfy the will of better men. When the existing world of freedom
has become faithless to the will of better men, that will fails
to find itself in the duties there recognised and must try to
find in the ideal world of the inner life alone the harmony which
actuality has lost. Once self-consciousness has grasped and secured
its formal right in this way, everything depends on the character
of the content which it gives to itself.

 Addition:
If we look more closely at this process of evaporation and see
how all specific determinations disappear into this simple concept
and then have to be condensed out of it again, what we find is
that it is primarily due to the fact that everything recognised
as right and duty may be proved by discursive thinking to be nugatory,
restricted, and in all respects not absolute. On the other hand,
just as subjectivity evaporates every content into itself, so
it may develop it out of itself once more. Everything which arises
in the ethical sphere is produced by this activity of mind. The
moral point of view, however, is defective because it is purely
abstract. When I am aware of my freedom as the substance of
my being, I am inactive and do nothing. But if I proceed to act
and look for principles on which to act, I grope for something
determinate and then demand its deduction from the concept of
the free will. While, therefore, it is right enough to evaporate
right and duty into subjectivity, it is wrong if this abstract
groundwork is not then condensed out again. It is only in times
when the world of actuality is hollow, spiritless, and unstable,
that an individual may be allowed to take refuge from actuality
in his inner life. Socrates lived at the time of the ruin of
the Athenian democracy. His thought vaporised the world around
him and he withdrew into himself to search there for the right
and the good. Even in our day there are cases when reverence
for the established order is more or less lacking; man insists
on having the authoritative as his will, as that to which he has
granted recognition.

 &sect; 139

Once self-consciousness has reduced all otherwise valid duties
to emptiness and itself to the sheer inwardness of the will, it
has become the potentiality of either making the absolutely universal
its principle, or equally well of elevating above the universal
the self-will of private particularity, taking that as its principle
and realising it through its actions, i.e. it has become potentially
evil.

 Remark:
To have a conscience, if conscience is only formal subjectivity,
is simply to be on the verge of slipping into evil; in independent
self-certainty, with its independence of knowledge and decision,
both morality and evil have their common root.

The origin of evil in general is to be found in the mystery of
freedom (i.e. in the speculative aspect of freedom), the mystery
whereby freedom of necessity arises out of the natural level of
the will and is something inward in comparison with that level.
 It is this natural level of the will which comes into existence
as a self-contradiction, as incompatible with itself in this opposition,
and so it is just this particularity of the will which later makes
itself evil. That is to say, particularity is always duality;
here it is the opposition of the natural level and the inwardness
of the will. In this opposition, the latter is only a relative
and abstract subjectivity which can draw its content only from
the determinate content of the natural will, from desire, impulse,
inclination, &c. Now it is said of these desires, impulses,
&c., that they may be either good or evil. But since the
will here makes into a determinant of its content both these impulses
in this contingent character which they possess as natural, and
also, therefore, the form which it has at this point, the form
of particularity itself, it follows that it is set in opposition
to the universal as inner objectivity, to the good, which comes
on the scene as the opposite extreme to immediate objectivity,
the natural pure and simple, as soon as the will is reflected
into itself and consciousness is a knowing consciousness.
 It is in this opposition that this inwardness of the will is
evil. Man is therefore evil by a conjunction between his natural
or undeveloped character and his reflection into himself; and
therefore evil belongs neither to nature as such by itself - unless
nature were supposed to be the natural character of the will which
rests in its particular content - nor to introverted reflection
by itself, i.e. cognition in general, unless this were to maintain
itself in that opposition to the universal.

With this facet of evil, its necessity, there is inevitably combined
the fact that this same evil is condemned to be that which of
necessity ought not to be, i.e. the fact that evil ought to be
annulled. It is not that there ought never to be a diremption
of any sort in the will - on the contrary, it is just this level
of diremption which distinguishes man from the unreasoning animal;
the point is that the will should not rest at that level and cling
to the particular as if that and not the universal were the essential
thing; it should overcome the diremption as a nullity. Further,
as to this necessity of evil, it is subjectivity, as infinite
self-reflection, which is present in and confronted by this opposition
of universal and particular; if it rests in this opposition, i.e.
if it is evil, then it is eo ipso independent, regarding
itself as isolated, and is itself this Self-Will. Therefore if
the individual subject as such does evil, the evil is purely and
simply his own responsibility.

 Addition:
The abstract self-certainty which knows itself as the basis of
everything has in it the potentiality either of willing the universality
of the concept or alternatively of taking a particular content
as a principle and realising that. The second alternative is
evil, which therefore always includes the abstraction of self-certainty.
 It is only man who is good, and he is good only because he can
also be evil. Good and evil are inseparable, and their inseparability
is rooted in the fact that the concept becomes an object to itself,
and as object it eo ipso acquires the character of difference.
 The evil will wills something opposed to the universality of
the will, while the good will acts in accordance with its true
concept.

The difficulty of the question as to how the will can be evil
as well as good usually arises because we think of the will as
related to itself purely positively and because we represent its
volition as something determinate confronting it, as the good.
 But the problem of the origin of evil may be more precisely put
in the form: ‘How does the negative come into the positive?' If
we begin by presupposing that in the creation of the world God
is the absolutely positive, then, turn where we will, we shall
never discover the negative within that positive, since to talk
of God's ‘Permitting' evil is to ascribe to him a passive relation
to evil which is unsatisfactory and meaningless. In the representative
thinking of religious mythology there is no comprehension of the
origin of evil; i.e. the positive and the negative are not discovered
in one another, there is only a representation of their succession
and juxtaposition, so that it is from outside that the negative
comes to the positive. But this cannot satisfy thought, which
demands a reason and a necessity and insists on apprehending the
negative as itself rooted in the positive. Now the solution of
the problem, the way the concept treats the matter, is already
contained in the concept, since the concept, or to speak more
concretely, the Idea, has it in its essence to differentiate itself
and to posit itself negatively. If we adhere to the purely positive,
i.e. if we rest in the unmixed good which is supposed to be good
at its source, then we are accepting an empty category of the
Understanding which clings to abstractions and one-sided categories
of this kind and by the very asking of this question makes it
a difficult one. If we begin with the standpoint of the concept,
however, we apprehend the positive as activity and as self-distinction.
 Evil and good alike have their origin in the will and the will
in its concept is both good and evil.

The natural will is implicitly the contradiction of self-distinction,
of being both inwardness and also self-awareness. To maintain
then that evil implies the further point that man is evil in so
far as his will is natural would be to contradict the usual idea
that it is just the natural will which is guiltless and good.
 But the natural will stands in opposition to the content of freedom,
and the child and the uneducated man, whose wills are only natural,
are for that very reason liable to be called to account for their
actions only in a less degree. Now when we speak of man, we mean
not the child but the self-conscious adult, and when we speak
of good, we mean the knowledge of it. It is doubtless true that
the natural is inherently innocent, neither good nor bad, but
when it is drawn into the orbit of the will which is free and
knows that it is free, it acquires the character of not being
free and is therefore evil. When man wills the natural,
it is no longer merely natural, but the negative opposed to the
good, i.e. to the concept of the will.

On the other hand, if it is now objected that since evil is rooted
in the concept and inevitable, man would be guiltless if he committed
it, our reply must be that a man's decision is his own act, and
his own act is freely chosen and his own responsibility. In the
religious legend it is said that man is as God when he knows good
and evil; and it is true that this likeness to God is present
in such knowledge in that the inevitability here is no natural
inevitability since on the contrary the decision is really the
transcendence of this duality of good and evil. When both good
and evil are placed before me, I have a choice between the two;
I can decide between them and endow my subjective character with
either. Thus the nature of evil is that man may will it but need
not.

 &sect; 140

In every end of a self-conscious subject, there is a positive
aspect (see § 135 ) necessarily present because the
end is what is purposed in an actual concrete action. This aspect
he knows how to elicit and emphasise, and he may then proceed
to regard it as a duty or a fine intention. By so interpreting
it, he is enabled to pass off his action as good in the eyes both
of himself and others, despite the fact that, owing to his reflective
character and his knowledge of the universal aspect of the will,
he is aware of the contrast between this aspect and the essentially
negative content of his action. To impose in this way on others
is hypocrisy; while to impose on oneself is a stage beyond hypocrisy,
a stage at which subjectivity claims to be absolute.

 Remark:
This final, most abstruse, form of evil, whereby evil is perverted
into good and good into evil, and consciousness, in being aware
of its power to effect this perversion, is also made aware of
itself as absolute, is the high-water mark of subjectivity at
the level of morality; it is the form into which evil has blossomed
in our present epoch, a result due to philosophy, i.e. to a shallowness
of thought which has twisted a profound concept into this shape
and usurped the name of philosophy, just as it has arrogated to
evil the name of good.

In this Remark, I will indicate briefly the chief forms of this
subjectivity which have become current.

  
 (a) In hypocrisy the following moments are contained:

 [a] knowledge of the true universal, whether knowledge in the form merely of a feeling for right and duty, or of a deeper cognition and apprehension of them;

 [b] volition of the particular which conflicts with this universal;

 [c] conscious comparison of both moments [a] and [b], so that the conscious subject is aware in willing that his particular volition is evil in character.

These points are descriptive of acting with a bad conscience; hypocrisy proper involves something more.

At one time great importance was attached to the question whether
an action was evil only in so far as it was done with a bad conscience,
i.e. with explicit knowledge of the three moments just specified.
 The inference from an affirmative answer is admirably drawn by
Pascal: Ils seront tous damn&eacute;s ces demi-p&eacute;cheurs,
qui ont quelque amour pour la vertu. Mais pour ces franc-p&eacute;cheurs,
p&eacute;cheurs endurcis, p&eacute;cheurs sans m&eacute;lange,
pleins et achev&eacute;s, 1'enfer ne les tient pas; ils ont tromp&eacute;
le diable &agrave; force de s'y abandonner.

 Footnote:
 Lettres provinciales, iv. In the same context,
Pascal also quotes Christ's intercession on the Cross for his
enemies: ‘Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do'
 - a superfluous prayer if the fact that they did not know what
they did made their action innocent and so took away the need
of forgiveness. Pascal quotes there too Aristotle's distinction
between the man who acts ouk eido ς and the one who acts
 agnown ; in the former type of ignorance, his action is
not freely willed (here the ignorance depends on external circumstances,
see above, § 117 ) and his action is not imputable
to him. But of the latter Aristotle says: ‘Every wicked man is
ignorant of what he ought to do and what he ought to refrain from
doing; and it is this kind of failure ( amartia ) which makes men unjust and
in general bad.... An ignorant choice' between good and evil ‘is
the cause not of the action's being involuntary' (of being non-imputable)
‘but only of its being wicked'. Aristotle evidently had a deeper
insight into the connection between knowing and willing than has
become common in a superficial philosophy which teaches that the
opposite of knowledge, the heart and enthusiasm, are the true
principles of ethical action.

The subjective right of self-consciousness to know whether an
action is truly good or evil in character must not be thought
of as so colliding with the absolute right of the objectivity
of this character that the two rights are represented as separable,
indifferent to one another, and related only accidentally. It
was such a conception of their relation that lay in particular
at the root of the old questions about efficacious grace. On
its formal side, evil is most peculiarly the individual's own,
since (a) it is precisely his subjectivity establishing itself
purely and simply for itself, and for that reason it is purely
and simply the individual's own responsibility
(see § 139 and the Remark thereto);
 (b) on his objective side man
accords with his concept inasmuch as he is mind, in a word a rational
entity, and has in his own nature as such the character of self-knowing
universality. Therefore it means failing to treat him with the
respect due to his concept if his good side is divorced from him,
so that the character of his evil action as evil is divorced from
him too and is not imputed to him as evil. How determinate is
the consciousness of these moments in distinction from one another,
or to what extent it has developed or failed to develop in clarity
so as to become a recognition of them, and to what degree an evil
action has been done with a conscience more or less downright
evil - all these questions are the more trivial aspect of the
matter, the aspect mainly concerned with the empirical.

  
 (b) Evil and doing evil with a bad conscience,
however, is not quite hypocrisy. Into hypocrisy there enters
in addition the formal character of falsity, first the falsity
of holding up evil as good in the eyes of others, of setting oneself
up to all appearance as good, conscientious, pious, and so on
 - conduct which in these circumstances is only a trick to deceive
others. Secondly, however, the had man may find in his good conduct
on other occasions, or in his piety, or, in a word, in good reasons,
a justification in his own eyes for the evil he does, because
he can use these reasons to pervert its apparent character from
evil into good. His ability to do this depends on the subjectivity
which, as abstract negativity, knows that all determinations are
subordinate to itself and issue from its own will.

  
 (c) In this perversion of evil into good
we may prima facie include the form of subjectivism known as Probabilism.
 Its guiding principle is that an action is permissible, and may
be done with an easy conscience, provided that the agent can hunt
out any single good reason for it, be it only the authority of
a single theologian, and even if other theologians are known by
the agent to dissent ever so widely from that authority. Even
in this idea there is still present the correct apprehension that
authority and a reason based on authority gives probability only,
although this is supposed to be enough to produce an easy conscience;
it is granted in Probabilism that a good reason is inevitably
of such a character that there may exist along with it different
reasons at least as good. Even here we must recognise a vestige
of objectivity in the admission that it is a reason which should
be the determining factor. But since the discrimination between
good and evil is made to depend on all those good reasons, including
theological authorities too, despite the fact that they are so
numerous and contradictory, the implication is that it is not
this objectivity of the thing, but subjectivity, which has the
last word. This means that caprice and self-will are made the
arbiters of good and evil, and the result is that ethics as well
as religious feeling is undermined. But the fact that it is private
subjectivity to which the decision falls is one which Probabilism
does not openly avow as its principle; on the contrary, as has
already been stated, it gives out that it is some reason or other
which is decisive, and Probabilism is to that extent still a form
of hypocrisy.

  
 (d) In the stages of subjectivism, the next in
ascending order is the view that the goodness of the will consists
in its willing the good; this willing of the abstract good
is supposed to suffice, in fact to be the sole requisite, to make
its action good. As the willing of something determinate, action
has a content, but good in the abstract determines nothing, and
hence it devolves on particular subjectivity to give this content
its character and constituents. just as in Probabilism anyone
who is not himself a learned R&eacute;v&eacute;rend P&egrave;re
 may have the subsumption of a determinate content under the
universal predicate ‘good' effected for him by the sole authority
of one such theologian, so here every subject, without any further
qualification, is invested with this honour of giving a content
to good in the abstract, or in other words subsuming a content
under a universal. This content is only one of the many elements
in an action as a concrete whole, and the others may perhaps entail
its description as ‘criminal' and ‘bad'. That determinate content
which I, as subject, give to the good, however, is the good known
to me in the action, i.e. it is my good intention
(see § 114 ).
Thus there arises a contradiction between descriptions:
according to one the action is good, according to the other it
is criminal. Hence also there seems to arise, in connection with
a concrete action, the question whether in such circumstances
the intention behind it is actually good. It may generally be
the case that the good is what is actually intended; but this
in fact must always be the case if it is held that good in the
abstract is the subject's determining motive. Where wrong is
done through an action which is well intentioned but in other
respects criminal and bad, the wrong so done must, of course,
also be good, and the important question would seem to be: which
of these sides of the action is really the essential one? This
objective question, however, is here out of place, or rather it
is the subjective consciousness alone whose decision constitutes
objectivity at this point. Besides, ‘essential' and ‘good' mean
the same thing; one is just as much an abstraction as the other.
 Good is that which is essential in respect of the will; and the
essential in this respect should be precisely this, that my action
be characterised as good in my eyes. But the subsumption under
the good of any content one pleases is the direct and explicit
result of the fact that this abstract good is totally devoid of
content and so is simply reduced to meaning anything positive,
i.e. to something which is valid from some single point of view
and which in its immediate character may even be valid as an essential
end, as for example to do good to the poor, to take thought for
myself, my life, my family, and so forth. Further, just as the
good is the abstract, so the bad too must be without content and
derive its specification from my subjectivity; and it is in this
way also that there arises the moral end of hating and uprooting
the bad, the nature of the bad being left unspecified.

Theft, cowardice, murder, and so forth, as actions, i.e. as achievements
of a subjective will, have the immediate character of being satisfactions
of such a will and therefore of being something positive. In
order to make the action a good one, it is only a question of
recognising this positive aspect of the action as my intention,
and this then becomes the essential aspect in virtue of which
the action is made good, simply because I recognise it as the
good in my intention. Theft in order to do good to the poor,
theft or flight from battle for the sake of fulfilling one's duty
to care for one's life or one's family (a poor family perhaps
into the bargain), murder out of hate or revenge (i.e. in order
to satisfy one's sense of one's own rights or of right in general,
or one's sense of another's wickedness, of wrong done by him to
oneself or to others or to the world or the nation at large, by
extirpating this wicked individual who is wickedness incarnate,
and thereby contributing at least one's quota to the project of
uprooting the bad) - all these actions are made well intentioned
and therefore good by this method of taking account of the positive
aspect of their content. Only the bare minimum of intelligence
is required to discover in any action, as those learned theologians
can, a positive side and so a good reason for it and a good intention
behind it. Hence it has been said that in the strict sense there
are no wicked men, since no one wills evil for the sake of evil,
i.e. no one wills a pure negative as such. On the contrary, everyone
always wills something positive, and therefore, on the view we
are considering, something good. In this abstract good the distinction
between good and evil has vanished together with all concrete
duties; for this reason, simply to will the good and to have a
good intention in acting is more like evil than good, because
the good willed is only this abstract form of good and therefore
to make it concrete devolves on the arbitrary Will of the subject.

To this context there also belongs the notorious maxim: ‘The end
justifies the means.' In itself and prima facie this expression
is trivial and pointless. Quite so, one may retort in terms equally
general, a just end of course justifies the means, while an unjust
end does not. The phrase: so ‘If the end is right, so is the
means' is a tautology, since the means is precisely that which
is nothing in itself but is for the sake of something else, and
therein, i.e. in the end, has its purpose and worth - provided
of course it be truly a means.

But when someone says that the end justifies the means, his purport
is not confined to this bare tautology; he understands by the
words something more specific, namely that to use as means to
a good end something which in itself is simply not a means at
all, to violate something in itself sacrosanct, in short to commit
a crime as a means to a good end, is permissible and even one's
bounden duty. (i) There floats before the minds of those who say
that the end justifies the means a vague consciousness of the
dialectic of the aforesaid ‘positive' element in isolated legal
or ethical principles, or of such equally vague general maxims
as: ‘Thou shalt not kill', or ‘Thou shalt take thought for thy
welfare and the welfare of thy family'. Executioners and soldiers
have not merely the right but the duty to kill men, though there
it has been precisely laid down what kind of men and what circumstances
make the killing permissible and obligatory. So also my welfare
and the welfare of my family must be subordinated to higher ends
and so reduced to means to their attainment. (ii) And yet what
bears the mark of crime is not a general maxim of that kind, left
vague and still subject to a dialectic; on the contrary, its specific
character is already objectively fixed. Now what is set up against
such a determinate crime, what is supposed to have deprived the
crime of its criminal nature, is the justifying end, and this
is simply subjective opinion about what is good and better. What
happens here is the same as what happens when the will stops at
willing good in the abstract, i.e. the absolute and valid determinate
character assigned to good and evil, right and wrong, is entirely
swept away and the determination of them is ascribed instead to
the individual's feeling, imagination, and caprice.

  

 (e) Subjective opinion is at last expressly given
out as the measuring-rod of right and duty and it is supposed
that the conviction which holds something to be right is to decide
the ethical character of an action. Since the good we will to
do is here still without content, the principle of conviction
only adds the information that the subsumption of an action under
the category of good is purely a personal matter. If this be
so, the very pretence of an ethical objectivity has totally disappeared.
 A doctrine like this is directly connected with the self-styled
philosophy, often mentioned already, which denies that the truth
is knowable - and the truth of mind qua will, the rationality
of mind in its self-actualising process, is the laws of ethics.
 Asserting, as such philosophising does, that the knowledge of
the true is an empty vanity, transcending the territory of science
(which is supposed to be mere appearance), it must in the matter
of action at once find its principle also in the apparent; thereby
ethics is reduced to the special theory of life held by the individual
and to his private conviction: The degradation into which philosophy
has thus sunk appears doubtless at a first glance to be only an
affair of supreme indifference, an occurrence confined to the
trivial field of academic futilities; but the view necessarily
makes itself a home in ethics, an essential part of philosophy;
and it is then that the true meaning of these theories makes its
first appearance in and is apprehended by the world of actuality.

The result of the dissemination of the view that subjective conviction,
and it alone, decides the ethical character of an action is that
the charge of hypocrisy, once so frequent, is now rarely heard;
you can only qualify wickedness as hypocrisy on the assumption
that certain actions are inherently and actually misdeeds, vices
and crimes, and that the defaulter is necessarily aware of them
as such, because he is aware of and recognises the principles
and outward acts of piety and honesty even in the pretence to
which he misapplies them. In other words, it was generally assumed
as regards evil that it is a duty to know the good and to be aware
of its distinction from evil. In any case, however, it was an
absolute injunction which forbade the commission of vicious and
criminal actions and which insisted on such actions being imputed
to the agent, so far as he was a man and not a beast. But if
a good heart, a good intention, a subjective conviction are set
forth as the sources from which conduct derives its worth, then
there is no longer any hypocrisy or immorality at all; for whatever
a man does, he can always justify by the reflection on it of good
intentions and motives, and by the influence of that conviction
it is good.

 Footnote:
‘That he feels completely convinced I have not
the least doubt. But how many men are led by such feelings of
conviction into the worst of misdeeds! Besides, if everything
may be excused on this ground, then that terminates the rational
judgement of good and wicked, honourable and shameful, resolutions.
 Lunacy in that case would have equal rights with reason; or in
other words reason would have no rights whatever, its judgement
would cease to have any validity. Its voice would be a minus
quantity; truth would be the possession of the man with no doubts!
 I tremble at the results of such toleration, for it would be
exclusively to the advantage of unreason. (Jacobi 1802.)

Thus there is no longer anything absolutely vicious or criminal;
and instead of the abovementioned frank and free, hardened and
unperturbed sinner, we have the man who is conscious of being
fully justified by intention and conviction. My good intention
in my action and my conviction of its goodness make it good.
We speak of judging and estimating an action; but on this
principle it is only the intention and conviction of the agent,
his faith, by which he ought to be judged. Not, however, his
faith in the sense in which Christ requires faith in objective
truth, so that on one who has a false faith, i.e. a conviction
bad in its content, the judgement to be pronounced must be a condemnation,
i.e. one in conformity with this content. On the contrary, faith
here means fidelity to conviction, and the question to be asked
about action is: ‘Has the agent in his acting kept true to his
conviction?' Fidelity to formal subjective conviction is thus made
the sole measuring-rod of duty.

This principle, under which conviction is expressly made something
subjective, cannot but thrust upon us the thought of possible
error, with the further implied presupposition of an absolute
law. But the law is no agent; it is only the actual human being
who acts. And, on the aforesaid principle, the only question,
in estimating the worth of human actions, is how far he has taken
up the law into his conviction. But if on this theory it is not
actions which are to be judged, i.e. measured generally, by that
law, it is impossible to see what the law is for and what end
it is to serve. Such a law is degraded to a mere external letter,
in fact to an empty word, if it is only my conviction which makes
it a law and invests it with obligatory force.

Such a law may claim its authority from God or the state. It
may even have behind it the authority of tens of centuries during
which it was the bond which gave men, with all their deeds and
destiny, coherence and subsistence. And these are authorities
which enshrine the convictions of countless individuals. Now
if I set against these the authority of my single conviction -
for as my subjective conviction its sole validity is authority
 - that at first seems a piece of monstrous self-conceit, but in
virtue of the principle that subjective conviction is to be the
measuring-rod, it is pronounced not to be self-conceit at all.

Even if reason and conscience - which shallow science and bad
sophistry can never altogether expel - admit with a noble illogicality
that error is possible, still by describing crime, and evil generally,
as only an error, we minimise the fault. To err is human -
who has not been mistaken on one point or another, whether he
had fresh or pickled cabbage for dinner yesterday, and about innumerable
other things of more or less importance? But the difference between
importance and triviality vanishes if everything turns on the
subjectivity of conviction and on persistence in it. The said
noble illogicality which admits the possibility of error is inevitable
then in the nature of the case, but when it comes round to say
that a wrong conviction is only an error, it only falls into a
further illogicality, the illogicality of dishonesty. At one
moment conviction is made the basis of ethics and of man's supreme
value, and is thus pronounced the supreme and the sacrosanct;
at another, all we have to do with is error, and my conviction
is something trivial and casual, in fact something strictly external,
which may turn out this way or that. Really, my being convinced
is something supremely trivial if I cannot know the truth; for
then it is a matter of indifference how I think, and all that
is left to my thinking is that empty good, the abstraction to
which the Understanding reduces the good.

One other point. It follows further, on this principle of justification
by conviction, that logic requires me, in dealing with the way
others act against my action, to admit that they are quite in
the right - so far at any rate as they maintain with faith and
conviction that my action is criminal. On such logic, not merely
do I gain nothing, I am even deposed from the post of liberty
and honour into a situation of slavery and dishonour. Justice,
which in the abstract is mine as well as theirs, I feel only as
a foreign subjective conviction, and when it is executed on me,
I fancy myself to be treated only by an external force.

  

 (f) Finally, the supreme form in which this subjectivism
is completely comprised and expressed is the phenomenon which
has been called by a name borrowed from Plato - ‘Irony'. The
name alone, however, is taken from Plato; he used it to describe
a way of speaking which Socrates employed in conversation when
defending the Idea of truth and justice against the conceit of
the Sophists and the uneducated. What he treated ironically, however,
was only their type of mind, not the Idea itself. Irony is only
a manner of talking against people. Except as directed against
persons, the essential movement of thought is dialectic, and Plato
was so far from regarding the dialectical in itself, still less
irony, as the last word in thought and a substitute for the Idea,
that he terminated the flux and reflux of thinking, let alone
of a subjective opinion, and submerged it in the substantiality
of the Idea.

 Footnote:
My colleague, the late Professor Solger,
adopted the word ‘irony' which Friedrich von Schlegel brought
into use at a comparatively early period of his literary career
and enhanced to equivalence with the said principle of subjectivity
knowing itself as supreme. But Solger's finer mind was above
such an exaggeration; he had philosophic insight and so seized
upon, emphasised, and retained only that part of Schlegel's view
which was dialectic in the strict sense, i.e. dialectic as the
pulsating drive of speculative inquiry. His last publication,
a solid piece of work, a thorough Kritik &uuml;ber die Vorlesungen
des Herrn August Wilhelm von Schlegel &uuml;ber dramatische
Kunst und Literatur , I find somewhat obscure, however, and
I cannot agree with the argument which he develops. ‘True irony',
he says, ‘arises from the view that so long as man lives in this
present world, it is only in this world that he can fulfil his
"appointed task" no matter how elevated a sense we give
to this expression. Any hope we may have of transcending finite
ends is foolish and empty conceit. ‘Even the highest is existent
for our conduct only in a shape that is limited and finite.' Rightly
understood, this is Platonic doctrine, and a true remark in rejection
of what he has referred to earlier, the empty striving towards
the (abstract) infinite. But to say that the highest is existent
in a limited and finite shape, like the ethical order (and that
order is in essence actual life and action), is very different
from saving that the highest thing is a finite end. The
outward shape, the form of finitude, in no way deprives the content
of ethical life of its substantiality and the infinity inherent
within it. Solger continues: ‘And just for this reason the highest
is in us as negligible as the lowest and perishes of
necessity with us and our nugatory thoughts and feelings. The
highest is truly existent in God alone, and as it perishes in
us it is transfigured into something divine, a divinity in which
we would have had no share but for its immediate presence revealed
in the very disappearance of our actuality; now the mood to which
this process directly comes home in human affairs is tragic irony.'
The arbitrary name ‘irony' would be of no importance, but there
is an obscurity here when it is said that it is ‘the highest'
which perishes with our nothingness and that it is in the disappearance
of our actuality that the divine is first revealed; e.g. again
(ibid., p. 91): ‘We see heroes beginning to wonder whether they
have erred in the noblest and finest elements of their feelings
and sentiments, not only in regard to their successful issue,
but also to their source and their worth; indeed, what elevates
us is the destruction of the best itself.' (The just destruction
of utter scoundrels and criminals who flaunt their villainy - the
hero of a modern tragedy Die Schuld, is one - has an interest
for criminal law, but none at all for art proper which is what
is in question here.) The tragic destruction of figures
whose ethical life is on the highest plane can interest and elevate
us and reconcile us to its occurrence only in so far as they come
on the scene in opposition to one another together with equally
justified but different ethical powers which have come into collision
through misfortune, because the result is that then these figures
acquire guilt through their opposition to an ethical law. Out
of this situation there arises the right and wrong of both parties
and therefore the true ethical Idea, which, purified and in triumph
over this one-sidedness, is thereby reconciled in us. Accordingly,
it is not the highest in us which perishes; we are elevated not
by the destruction of the best but by the triumph of the true.
 This it is which constitutes the true, purely ethical, interest
of ancient tragedy (in romantic tragedy the character of the interest
undergoes a certain modification). All this I have worked out
in detail in my Phenomenology of Mind . But the ethical
Idea is actual and pregnant in the world of social institutions
without the misfortune of tragic clashes and the destruction of
individuals overcome by this misfortune. And this Idea's (the
highest's) revelation of itself in its actuality as anything but
a nullity is what the external embodiment of ethical life, the
state, purposes and effects, and what the ethical self-consciousness
possesses, intuits, and knows in the state and what the thinking
mind comprehends there.

The culminating form of this subjectivity which conceives itself
as the final court of appeal - our topic here - can be nothing except
what was implicitly present already in its preceding forms, namely
subjectivity knowing itself as the arbiter and judge of truth,
right, and duty. It consists then in this, that it knows the
objective ethical principles, but fails in self-forgetfulness
and self-renunciation to immerse itself in their seriousness and
to base action upon them. Although related to them, it holds
itself aloof from them and knows itself as that which wills and
decides thus, although it may equally well will and decide otherwise.
 You actually accept a law, it says, and respect it as absolute.
 So do I, but I go further than you, because I am beyond this
law and can make it to suit myself. It is not the thing that is
excellent, but I who am so; as the master of law and thing alike,
I simply play with them as with my caprice; my consciously ironical
attitude lets the highest perish and I merely hug myself at the
thought. This type of subjectivism not merely substitutes a void
for the whole content of ethics, right, duties, and laws - and so
is evil, in fact evil through and through and universally - but
in addition its form is a subjective void, i.e. it knows itself
as this contentless void and in this knowledge knows itself as
absolute.

In my Phenomenology of Mind, I have shown how this
absolute self-complacency fails to rest in a solitary worship
of itself but builds up a sort of community whose bond and substance
is, e.g., the ‘mutual Asseveration of conscientiousness and good
intentions, the enjoyment of this mutual purity', but is above
all ‘the refreshment derived from the glory of this self-knowledge
and self-expression, from the glory of fostering and cherishing
this experience'. I have shown also how what has been called
a ‘beautiful soul' - that still nobler type of subjectivism which
empties the objective of all content and so fades away until it
loses all actuality - is a variation of subjectivism like other
forms of the same phenomenon akin to the series of them here considered.
 What is said here may be compared with the entire section (C),
‘Conscience', in the Phenomenology, especially the part
dealing with the transition to a higher stage - a stage, however,
there different in characters

 Addition:
Representative thinking may go further and pervert the evil will
into a show of goodness. Although it cannot alter the nature
of evil, it can invest it with a show of goodness. Since every
action has a positive aspect, and since the category of good as
opposed to evil is likewise reduced to positivity, I may claim
that my action in its bearing on my intention is good. Thus evil
has good linked with it not only in my consciousness but also
if we look at my action on its positive side. When self-consciousness
gives out, to others only, that its action is good, this form
of subjectivism is hypocrisy. But if it goes so far as to claim
that the deed is good in its own eyes also, then we have a still
higher peak of the subjectivism which knows itself as absolute.
 For this type of mind absolute good and absolute evil have both
vanished, and the subject is therefore at liberty to pass himself
off at discretion as anything he likes. This is the position
of the absolute sophistry which usurps the office of lawgiver
and rests the distinction between good and evil on its own caprice.
 The chief hypocrites are the pious ones (the Tartuffes) who are
punctilious in every ritual observance and may even be religious
to all appearance, while yet they do just as they please. There
is little mention of hypocrites nowadays, partly because the accusation
of hypocrisy seems to be too harsh; partly, however, because hypocrisy
in its naive form has more or less disappeared. This downright
falsehood, this veneer of goodness, has now become too transparent
not to be seen through, and the divorce between doing good with
one hand and evil with the other no longer occurs, since advancing
culture has weakened the opposition between these categories.

Instead, hypocrisy has now assumed the subtler form of Probabilism,
which involves the agent's attempt to represent a transgression
as something good from the point of view of his private conscience.
 This doctrine can only arise when the moral and the good are
determined by authority, with the result that there are as many
reasons as there are authorities for supposing that evil is good.
 Casuist theologians, Jesuits especially, have worked up these
cases of conscience and multiplied them ad infinitum.

These cases have now been elaborated to such a high degree of
subtlety that numerous clashes have arisen between them, and the
opposition between good and evil has become so weak that in single
instances they appear to turn into one another. The only desideratum
now is probability, i.e. something approximately good, something
which may be supported by any single reason or authority. Thus
the special characteristic of this attitude is that its content
is purely abstract; it sets up the concrete content as something
inessential or rather abandons it to bare opinion. On this principle,
anyone may have committed a crime and yet have willed the good.
 For example, if a bad character is murdered, the positive side
of the action may be given out to be the withstanding of evil
and the will to diminish it.

Now the next step beyond Probabilism is that it is no longer a
question of someone else's statement or authority; it is a question
only of the subject himself, i.e. of his own convictions conviction
which alone is able to make a thing good. The defect here is
that everything is supposed to fall within the orbit of conviction
alone and that the absolutely right, for which this conviction
should be only the form, no longer exists. It is certainly not
a matter of indifference whether I do something by habit and custom
or because I am actuated throughout by the truth which underlies
these. But objective truth is still different from my conviction,
because conviction lacks the distinction between good and evil.
 Conviction always remains conviction, and the bad could only
be that of which I am not convinced.

Now while this obliteration of good and evil implies a very lofty
attitude, there is involved in this attitude the admission that
it is subject to error, and to that extent it is brought down
from its pedestal into mere fortuitousness and seems undeserving
of respect. Now this form of subjectivism is irony, the consciousness
that this principle of conviction is not worth much and that,
lofty criterion though it be, it is only caprice that governs
it. This attitude is really a product of Fichte's philosophy,
which proclaims that the Ego is absolute, i.e. is absolute certainty,
the ‘universal self-hood' which advances through a course of further
development to objectivity. Of Fichte himself it cannot property
be said that he made subjective caprice a guiding principle in
ethics, but, later on, this principle of the mere particular,
in the sense of ‘particular self-hood', was deified by Friedrich
von Schlegel with reference to the good and the beautiful. As
a result, he made objective goodness only an image of my conviction,
receiving support from my efforts alone, and dependent for its
appearance and disappearance on me as its lord and master. If
I relate myself to something objective, it vanishes at the same
moment before my eyes, and so I hover over a pit of nothingness,
summoning shapes from the depths and annihilating them. This
supreme type of subjectivism can emerge only in a period of advanced
culture when faith has lost its seriousness, and its essence is
simply ‘all is vanity'.

 Transition from Morality to Ethical Life

 &sect; 141

For the good as the substantial universal of freedom,
but as something still abstract, there are therefore required
determinate characteristics of some sort and the principle for
determining them, though a principle identical with the good itself.
 For conscience similarly, as the purely abstract principle of
determination, it is required that its decisions shall be universal
and objective. If good and conscience are each kept abstract
and thereby elevated to independent totalities, then both become
the indeterminate which ought to be determined. But the integration
of these two relative totalities into an absolute identity has
already been implicitly achieved in that this very subjectivity
of pure self-certainty, aware in its vacuity of its gradual evaporation,
is identical with the abstract universality of the good. The
identity of the good with the subjective will, an identity which
therefore is concrete and the truth of them both, is Ethical Life.

 Remark:
The details of such a transition of the concept are made intelligible
in logic. Here, however, it need only be said that it is the
nature of the restricted and the finite (i.e. here the abstract
good which only ought to be [but is not], and the equally abstract
subjectivity which only ought to be good [but is not])
to have its opposite implicit within it, the good its actuality,
and subjectivity (the moment in which ethical life is actual)
the good; but since they are one-sided they are not yet posited
in accordance with their implicit nature. They become so posited
in their negation. That is to say, in their one-sidedness, when
each is bent on declining to have in it what is in it implicitly - when
the good is without subjectivity and a determinate character,
and the determining principle, subjectivity, is without what is
implicit within it - and when both build themselves into independent
totalities, they are annulled and thereby reduced to moments,
to moments of the concept which becomes manifest as their unity
and, having acquired reality precisely through this positing of
its moments, is now present as Idea - as the concept which has matured
its determinations to reality and at the same time is present
in their identity as their implicit essence.

The embodiment of freedom which was [a] first of all immediate
as right, is [b] characterised in the reflection of self-consciousness
as good. [c] The third stage, originating here, in its transition
from [b] to ethical life, as the truth of good and subjectivity,
is therefore the truth both of subjectivity and right. Ethical
life is a subjective disposition, but one imbued with what is
inherently right. The fact that this Idea is the truth of the
concept of freedom is something which, in philosophy, must be
proved, not presupposed, not adopted from feeling or elsewhere.
 This demonstration is contained only in the fact that right and
the moral self-consciousness both display in themselves their
regression to this Idea as their outcome. Those who hope to be
able to dispense with proof and demonstration in philosophy show
thereby that they are still far from knowing the first thing about
what philosophy is. On other topics argue they may, but in philosophy
they have no right to join in the argument if they wish to argue
without the concept.

 Addition:
Each of the two principles hitherto discussed, namely good in
the abstract and conscience, is defective in lacking its opposite.
 Good in the abstract evaporates into something completely powerless,
into which I may introduce any and every content, while the subjectivity
of mind becomes just as worthless because it lacks any objective
significance. Thus a longing may arise for an objective order
in which man gladly degrades himself to servitude and total subjection,
if only to escape the torment of vacuity and negation. Many Protestants
have recently gone over to the Roman Catholic Church, and they
have done so because they found their inner life worthless and
grasped at something fixed, at a support, an authority, even if
it was not exactly the stability of thought which they caught.

The unity of the subjective with the objective and absolute good
is ethical life, and in it we find the reconciliation which accords
with the concept. Morality is the form of the will in general
on its subjective side. Ethical life is more than the subjective
form and the self-determination of the will; in addition it has
as its content the concept of the will, namely freedom. The right
and the moral cannot exist independently; they must have the ethical
as their support and foundation, for the right lacks the moment
of subjectivity, while morality in turn possesses that moment
alone, and consequently both the right and the moral lack actuality
by themselves. Only the infinite, the Idea, is actual. Right
exists only as a branch of a whole or like the ivy which twines
itself round a tree firmly rooted on its own account.

 Ethical Life (next section)

 Hegel-by-HyperText Home Page @ marxists.org