Hegel's Philosophy of Right: Civil Society

 Hegel's Philosophy of Right

 Third Part: Ethical Life

ii Civil Society

 A: System of needs B: Justice C: Corporations

 &sect; 182

The concrete person, who is himself the object of his particular
aims, is, as a totality and a mixture of caprice and physical
necessity, one principle of civil society. But the particular
person is essentially so related to other particular persons that
each establishes himself and finds satisfaction by means of the
others, and at the same time purely and simply by means of the
form of universality, the second principle here.

 Addition: Civil society is the [stage of] difference
which intervenes between the family and the state, even if its
formation follows later in time than that of the state, because,
as [the stage of] difference, it presupposes the state; to subsist
itself, it must have the state before its eyes as something self-subsistent.
 Moreover, the creation of civil society is the achievement of
the modern world which has for the first time given all determinations
of the Idea their due. If the state is represented as a unity
of different persons, as a unity which is only a partnership,
then what is really meant is only civil society. Many modern constitutional
lawyers have been able to bring within their purview no theory
of the state but this. In civil society each member is his own
end, everything else is nothing to him. But except in contact
with others he cannot attain the whole compass of his ends, and
therefore these others are means to the end of the particular
member. A particular end, however, assumes the form of universality
through this relation to other people, and it is attained in the
simultaneous attainment of the welfare of others. Since particularity
is inevitably conditioned by universality, the whole sphere of
civil society is the territory of mediation where there is free
play for every idiosyncrasy, every talent, every accident of birth
and fortune, and where waves of every passion gush forth, regulated
only by reason glinting through them. Particularity, restricted
by universality, is the only standard whereby each particular
member promotes his welfare.

 &sect; 183

In the course of the actual attainment of selfish ends - an attainment
conditioned in this way by universality - there is formed a system
of complete interdependence, wherein the livelihood, happiness,
and legal status of one man is interwoven with the livelihood,
happiness, and rights of all. On this system, individual happiness,
&c., depend, and only in this connected system are they actualised
and secured. This system may be prima facie regarded as the external
state, the state based on need, the state as the Understanding
envisages it.

 &sect; 184

The Idea in this its stage of division imparts to each of
its moments a characteristic embodiment; to particularity it gives
the right to develop and launch forth in all directions; and to
universality the right to prove itself not only the ground and
necessary form of particularity, but also the authority standing
over it and its final end. It is the system of the ethical order,
split into its extremes and lost, which constitutes the Idea's
abstract moment, its moment of reality. Here the Idea is present
only as a relative totality and as the inner necessity behind
this outward appearance.

 Addition: Here ethical life is split into its
extremes and lost; the immediate unity of the family has fallen
apart into a plurality. Reality here is externality, the decomposing
of the concept, the self-subsistence of its moments which have
now won their freedom and their determinate existence. Though
in civil society universal and particular have fallen apart, yet
both are still reciprocally bound together and conditioned. While
each of them seems to do just the opposite to the other and supposes
that it can exist only by keeping the other at arm's length, none
the less each still conditions the other. Thus, for example,
most people regard the paying of taxes as injurious to their particular
interest, as something inimical and obstructive of their own ends.
 Yet, however true this seems , particular ends cannot be
attained without the help of the universal, and a country where
no taxes were paid could not be singled out as invigorating its
citizens. Similarly, it might seem that universal ends would
be more readily attainable if the universal absorbed the strength
of the particulars in the way described, for instance, in Plato's
 Republic. But this, too, is only an illusion, since both
universal and particular turn into one another and exist only
for and by means of one another. If I further my ends, I further
the ends of the universal, and this in turn furthers my end.

 &sect; 185

Particularity by itself, given free rein in every direction
to satisfy its needs, accidental caprices, and subjective desires,
destroys itself and its substantive concept in this process of
gratification. At the same time, the satisfaction of need, necessary
and accidental alike, is accidental because it breeds new desires
without end, is in thoroughgoing dependence on caprice and external
accident, and is held in check by the power of universality.
In these contrasts and their complexity, civil society affords
a spectacle of extravagance and want as well as of the physical
and ethical degeneration common to them both.

 Remark: The development of particularity to self-subsistence
(compare Remark to § 124 ) is the moment which appeared in the ancient world as an invasion of ethical corruption and as
the ultimate cause of that world's downfall. Some of these ancient
states were built on the patriarchal and religious principle,
others on the principle of an ethical order which was more explicitly
intellectual, though still comparatively simple; in either case
they rested on primitive unsophisticated intuition. Hence they
could not withstand the disruption of this state of mind when
self-consciousness was infinitely reflected into itself; when
this reflection began to emerge, they succumbed to it, first in
spirit and then in substance, because the simple principle underlying
them lacked the truly infinite power to be found only in that
unity which allows both sides of the antithesis of reason to
develop themselves separately in all their strength and which
has so overcome the antithesis that it maintains itself in it
and integrates it in itself.

In his Republic, Plato displays the substance of ethical
life in its ideal beauty and truth; but he could only cope with
the principle of self-subsistent particularity, which in his day
had forced its way into Greek ethical life, by setting up in opposition
to it his purely substantial state. He absolutely excluded it
from his state, even in its very beginnings in private property
(see Remark to § 46 )
and the family, as well as in its more
mature form as the subjective will, the choice of a social position,
and so forth. It is this defect which is responsible both for
the misunderstanding of the deep and substantial truth of Plato's
state and also for the usual view of it as a dream of abstract
thinking, as what is often called a ‘mere ideal'. The principle
of the self-subsistent inherently infinite personality of the
individual, the principle of subjective freedom, is denied its
right in the purely substantial form which Plato gave to mind
in its actuality. This principle dawned in an inward form in
the Christian religion and in an external form (and therefore
in one linked with abstract universality) in the Roman world.
 It is historically subsequent to the Greek world, and the philosophic
reflection which descends to its depth is likewise subsequent
to the substantial Idea of Greek philosophy.

 Addition: Particularity by itself is measureless
excess, and the forms of this excess are themselves measureless.
 By means of his ideas and reflections man expands his desires,
which are not a closed circle like animal instinct, and carries
them on to the false infinite. At the other end of the scale,
however, want and destitution are measureless too, and the discord
of this situation can be brought into a harmony only by the state
which has powers over it. Plato wished to exclude particularity
from his state, but this is no help, since help on these lines
would contravene the infinite right of the Idea to allow freedom
to the particular.

It was in the Christian religion in the first place that the right
of subjectivity arose, together with the infinity of self-awareness,
and while granting this right, the whole order must at the same
time retain strength enough to put particularity in harmony with
the unity of ethical life.

 &sect; 186

But in developing itself independently to totality, the
principle of particularity passes over into universality, and
only there does it attain its truth and the right to which its
positive actuality is entitled. This unity is not the identity
which the ethical order requires, because at this level, that
of division (see § 184 ), both principles are self-subsistent.
 It follows that this unity is present here not as freedom but
as necessity, since it is by compulsion that the particular rises
to the form of universality and seeks and gains its stability
in that form.

 &sect; 187

Individuals in their capacity as burghers in this state
are private persons whose end is their own interest. This end
is mediated through the universal which thus appears as a means to its realisation. Consequently, individuals can attain their
ends only in so far as they themselves determine their knowing,
willing, and acting in a universal way and make themselves links
in this chain of social connections. In these circumstances,
the interest of the Idea - an interest of which these members
of civil society are as such unconscious - lies in the process whereby
their singularity and their natural condition are raised, as a
result of the necessities imposed by nature as well as of arbitrary
needs, to formal freedom and formal universality of knowing and
willing - the process whereby their particularity is educated up
to subjectivity.

 Remark: The idea that the state of nature is
one of innocence and that there is a simplicity of manners in
uncivilised ( ungebildeter ) peoples, implies treating
education ( Bildung ) as something purely external,
the ally of corruption. Similarly, the feeling that needs, their
satisfaction, the pleasures and comforts of private life, and
so forth, are absolute ends, implies treating education as a mere
means to these ends. Both these views display lack of acquaintance
with the nature of mind and the end of reason. Mind attains its
actuality only by creating a dualism within itself, by submitting
itself to physical needs and the chain of these external necessities,
and so imposing on itself this barrier and this finitude, and
finally by maturing ( bildet ) itself inwardly even
when under this barrier until it overcomes it and attains its
objective reality in the finite. The end of reason, therefore,
is neither the manners of an unsophisticated state of nature,
nor, as particularity develops, the pleasure for pleasure's sake
which education procures. On the contrary, its end is to banish
natural simplicity, whether the passivity which is the absence
of the self, or the crude type of knowing and willing, i.e. immediacy
and singularity, in which mind is absorbed. It aims in the first
instance at securing for this, its external condition, the rationality
of which it is capable, i.e. the form of universality or the Understanding
( Verst&auml;ndigkeit ). By this means alone does
mind become at home with itself within this pure externality.

There, then, mind's freedom is existent and mind becomes objective
to itself in this element which is implicitly inimical to mind's
appointed end, freedom; it has to do there only with what it has
itself produced and stamped with its seal. It is in this way
then that the form of universality comes explicitly into existence
in thought, and this form is the only worthy element for the existence
of the Idea. The final purpose of education, therefore, is liberation
and the struggle for a higher liberation still; education is the
absolute transition from an ethical substantiality which is immediate
and natural to the one which is intellectual and so both infinitely
subjective and lofty enough to have attained universality of
form. In the individual subject, this liberation is the hard
struggle against pure subjectivity of demeanour, against the immediacy
of desire, against the empty subjectivity of feeling and the caprice
of inclination. The disfavour showered on education is due in
part to its being this hard struggle; but it is through this educational
struggle that the subjective will itself attains objectivity within,
an objectivity in which alone it is for its part capable and worthy
of being the actuality of the Idea.

Moreover, this form of universality - the Understanding, to which
particularity has worked its way and developed itself, brings
it about at the same time that particularity becomes individuality
genuinely existent in its own eyes. And since it is from this
particularity that the universal derives the content which fills
it as well as its character as infinite self-determination, particularity
itself is present in ethical life as infinitely independent free
subjectivity. This is the position which reveals education as
a moment immanent in the Absolute and which makes plain its infinite
value.

 Addition: By educated men, we may prima facie
understand those who without the obtrusion of personal idiosyncrasy
can do what others do. It is precisely this idiosyncrasy, however,
which uneducated men display, since their behaviour is not governed
by the universal characteristics of the situation. Similarly,
an uneducated man is apt to hurt the feelings of his neighbours.
He simply lets himself go and does not reflect on the susceptibilities
of others. It is not that he intends to hurt them, but his conduct
is not consonant with his intention. Thus education rubs the
edges off particular characteristics until a man conducts himself
in accordance with the nature of the thing. Genuine originality,
which produces the real thing, demands genuine education, while
bastard originality adopts eccentricities which only enter the
heads of the uneducated.

 &sect; 188

Civil society contains three moments:

 (A) The mediation of need and one man's satisfaction through his labour and the satisfaction of the needs of all others - the System of Needs .

 (B) The actuality of the universal principle of freedom therein contained - the protection of property through the Administration of Justice .

 (C) Provision against contingencies still lurking in systems (A) and (B), and care for particular interest, as a common interest, by means of the Public Authority and the Corporation .

 A. The System of Needs

 a: Kind of Need b: Kind of Labour c: Classes

 &sect; 189.

Particularity is in the first instance characterised in
general by its contrast with the universal principle of the will and
thus is subjective need (see § 59 ).
This attains its objectivity i.e. its satisfaction, by means of [a] external things, which
at this stage are likewise the property and product of the needs
and wills of others, and [b] labour and effort, the middle term
between the subjective and the objective. The aim here is the
satisfaction of subjective particularity, but the universal asserts
itself in the bearing which this satisfaction has on the needs
of others and their free arbitrary wills. The show of rationality
thus produced in this sphere of finitude is the Understanding,
and this is the aspect which is of most importance in considering
this sphere and which itself constitutes the reconciling element
within it.

 Remark: Political economy is the science which
starts from this view of needs and labour but then has the task
of explaining mass-relationships and mass-movements in their complexity
and their qualitative and quantitative character. This is one
of the sciences which have arisen out of the conditions of the
modern world. Its development affords the interesting spectacle
(as in Smith, Say, and Ricardo) of thought working upon the endless
mass of details which confront it at the outset and extracting
therefrom the simple principles of the thing, the Understanding
effective in the thing and directing it. It is to find reconciliation
here to discover in the sphere of needs this show of rationality
lying in the thing and effective there; but if we look at it from
the opposite point of view, this is the field in which the Understanding
with its subjective aims and moral fancies vents its discontent
and moral frustration.

 Addition: There are certain universal needs such
as food, drink, clothing, &c., and it depends entirely on
accidental circumstances how these are satisfied. The fertility
of the soil varies from place to place, harvests vary from year
to year, one man is industrious, another indolent. But this medley
of arbitrariness generates universal characteristics by its own
working; and this apparently scattered and thoughtless sphere
is upheld by a necessity which automatically enters it. To discover
this necessary element here is the object of political economy,
a science which is a credit to thought because it finds laws for
a mass of accidents. It is an interesting spectacle here to see
all chains of activity leading back to the same point; particular
spheres of action fall into groups, influence others, and are
helped or hindered by others. The most remarkable thing here
is this mutual interlocking of particulars, which is what one
would least expect because at first sight everything seems to
be given over to the arbitrariness of the individual, and it has
a parallel in the solar system which displays to the eye only
irregular movements, though its laws may none the less be ascertained.

 (a) The Kind of Need and Satisfaction [typical of civil society]

 &sect; 190

An animal's needs and its ways and means of satisfying them
are both alike restricted in scope. Though man is subject to
this restriction too, yet at the same time he evinces his transcendence
of it and his universality, first by the multiplication of needs
and means of satisfying them, and secondly by the differentiation
and division of concrete need into single parts and aspects which
in turn become different needs, particularised and so more abstract.

 Remark: In [abstract] right, what we had before
us was the person; in the sphere of morality, the subject; in
the family, the family-member; in civil society as a whole, the
burgher or bourgeois. Here at the standpoint of needs (compare
 Remark to § 123 ) what we have before us is the composite idea which we call man. Thus this is the first time, and
indeed properly the only time, to speak of man in this
sense.

 Addition: An animal is restricted to particularity.
 It has its instincts and means of satisfying them, means which
are limited and which it cannot overstep. Some insects are parasitic
on a certain kind of plant; some animals have a wider range and
can live in different climates, but there is always a restriction
preventing them from having the range open to man. The need of
shelter and clothing, the necessity of cooking his food to make
it fit to eat and to overcome its natural rawness, both mean that
man has less comfort than an animal, and indeed, as mind, he ought
to have less. Intelligence, with its grasp of distinctions, multiplies
these human needs, and since taste and utility become criteria
of judgment, even the needs themselves are affected thereby.
 Finally, it is no longer need but opinion which has to be satisfied,
and it is just the educated man who analyses the concrete into
its particulars. The very multiplication of needs involves a
check on desire, because when many things are in use, the urge
to obtain any one thing which might be needed is less strong,
and this is a sign that want altogether is not so imperious.

 &sect; 191

Similarly, the means to particularised needs and all the
ways of satisfying these are themselves divided and multiplied
and so in turn become proximate ends and abstract needs. This
multiplication goes on ad infinitum ; taken as a whole, it is refinement,
i.e. a discrimination between these multiplied needs, and judgment
on the suitability of means to their ends.

 Addition: What the English call ‘comfort' is
something inexhaustible and illimitable. [Others can discover
to you that what you take to be] comfort at any stage is discomfort,
and these discoveries never come to an end. Hence the need for
greater comfort does not exactly arise within you directly; it
is suggested to you by those who hope to make a profit from its
creation.

 &sect; 192

Needs and means, as things existent realiter , become something
which has being for others by whose needs and labour satisfaction
for all alike is conditioned. When needs and means become abstract
in quality (see § 191 ), abstraction is also a character of
the reciprocal relation of individuals to one another. This abstract
character, universality, is the character of being recognised
and is the moment which makes concrete, i.e. social, the isolated
and abstract needs and their ways and means of satisfaction.

 Addition: The fact that I must direct my conduct
by reference to others introduces here the form of universality.
 It is from others that I acquire the means of satisfaction and
I must accordingly accept their views. At the same time, however,
I am compelled to produce means for the satisfaction of others.
 We play into each other's hands and so hang together. To this
extent everything private becomes something social. In dress
fashions and hours of meals, there are certain conventions which
we have to accept because in these things it is not worth the
trouble to insist on displaying one's own discernment. The
wisest thing here is to do as others do.

 &sect; 193

This social moment thus becomes a particular end-determinant
for means in themselves and their acquisition, as well as for
the manner in which needs are satisfied. Further, it directly
involves the demand for equality of satisfaction with others.
 The need for this equality and for emulation, which is the equalising
of oneself with others, as well as the other need also present
here, the need of the particular to assert itself in some distinctive
way, become themselves a fruitful source of the multiplication
of needs and their expansion.

 &sect; 194

Since in social needs, as the conjunction of immediate or
natural needs with mental needs arising from ideas, it is needs
of the latter type which because of their universality make themselves
preponderant, this social moment has in it the aspect of liberation,
i.e. the strict natural necessity of need is obscured and man
is concerned with his own opinion, indeed with an opinion which
is universal, and with a necessity of his own making alone, instead
of with an external necessity, an inner contingency, and mere
caprice.

 Remark: The idea has been advanced that in respect
of his needs man lived in freedom in the so-called ‘state of nature'
when his needs were supposed to be confined to what are known
as the simple necessities of nature, and when he required for
their satisfaction only the means which the accidents of nature
directly assured to him. This view takes no account of the moment
of liberation intrinsic to labour, on which see the following Paragraphs.
 And apart from this, it is false, because to be confined to mere
physical needs as such and their direct satisfaction would simply
be the condition in which the mental is plunged in the natural
and so would be one of savagery and unfreedom, while freedom itself
is to be found only in the reflection of mind into itself, in
mind's distinction from nature, and in the reflex of mind in nature.

 &sect; 195

This liberation is abstract since the particularity of the
ends remains their basic content. When social conditions tend
to multiply and subdivide needs, means, and enjoyments indefinitely
 - a process which, like the distinction between natural and refined
needs, has no qualitative limits - this is luxury. In this same
process, however, dependence and want increase ad infinitum , and
the material to meet these is permanently barred to the needy
man because it consists of external objects with the special character
of being property, the embodiment of the free will of others,
and hence from his point of view its recalcitrance is absolute.

 Addition: The entire Cynical mode of life adopted
by Diogenes was nothing more or less than a product of Athenian
social life, and what determined it was the way of thinking against
which his whole manner protested. Hence it was not independent
of social conditions but simply their result; it was itself a
rude product of luxury. When luxury is at its height, distress
and depravity are equally extreme, and in such circumstances Cynicism
is the outcome of opposition to refinement.

 (b) The Kind of Labour [typical of civil society]

 &sect; 196

The means of acquiring and preparing the particularised
means appropriate to our similarly particularised needs is labour.
 Through labour the raw material directly supplied by nature is
specifically adapted to these numerous ends by all sorts of different
processes. Now this formative change confers value on means and
gives them their utility, and hence man in what he consumes is
mainly concerned with the products of men. It is the products
of human effort which man consumes.

 Addition: There is hardly any raw material which
does not need to be worked on before use. Even air has to be
worked for because we have to warm it. Water is perhaps the only
exception, because we can drink it as we find it. It is by the
sweat of his brow and the toil of his hands that man obtains the
means to satisfy his needs.

 &sect; 197

The multiplicity of objects and situations which excite
interest is the stage on which theoretical education develops.
 This education consists in possessing not simply a multiplicity
of ideas and facts, but also a flexibility and rapidity of mind,
ability to pass from one idea to another, to grasp complex and
general relations, and so on. It is the education of the understanding
in every way, and so also the building up of language. Practical
education, acquired through working, consists first in the automatically
recurrent need for something to do and the habit of simply being
busy; next, in the strict adaptation of one's activity according
not only to the nature of the material worked on, but also, and
especially, to the pleasure of other workers; and finally, in
a habit, produced by this discipline, of objective activity and
universally recognised aptitudes.

 Addition: The savage is lazy and is distinguished
from the educated man by his brooding stupidity, because practical
education is just education in the need and habit of being busy.
 A clumsy man always produces a result he does not intend; he
is not master of his own job. The skilled worker, on the other
hand, may be said to be the man who produces the thing as it ought
to be and who hits the nail on the head without shrinking ( keine
Spr&ouml;digkeit in seinem subjektiven Tun gegen den Zweck
 findet ).

 &sect; 198

The universal and objective element in labour, on the other
hand, lies in the abstracting process which effects the subdivision
of needs and means and thereby eo ipso subdivides production and
brings about the division of labour. By this division, the labour
of the individual becomes less complex, and consequently his skill
at his section of the job increases, like his output. At the
same time, this abstraction of one man's skill and means of production
from another's completes and makes necessary everywhere the dependence
of men on one another and their reciprocal relation in the satisfaction
of their other needs. Further, the abstraction of one man's production
from another's makes labour more and more mechanical, until finally
man is able to step aside and install machines in his place.

 (c) Capital [and class-divisions]

 &sect; 199

When men are thus dependent on one another and reciprocally
related to one another in their labour and the satisfaction of their
needs, subjective self-seeking turns into a contribution to the
satisfaction of the needs of everyone else. That is to say, by
a dialectical advance, subjective self-seeking turns into the
mediation of the particular through the universal, with the result
that each man in earning, producing, and enjoying on his own account
is eo ipso producing and earning for the enjoyment of everyone
else. The compulsion which brings this about is rooted in the
complex interdependence of each on all, and it now presents itself
to each as the universal permanent capital
(see § 170 ) which
gives each the opportunity, by the exercise of his education and
skill, to draw a share from it and so be assured of his livelihood,
while what he thus earns by means of his labour maintains and increases
the general capital.

 &sect; 200

A particular man's resources, or in other words his opportunity
of sharing in the general resources, are conditioned, however,
partly by his own unearned principal (his capital), and partly
by his skill; this in turn is itself dependent not only on his
capital, but also on accidental circumstances whose multiplicity
introduces differences in the development of natural, bodily,
and mental characteristics, which were already in themselves dissimilar.
 In this sphere of particularity, these differences are conspicuous
in every direction and on every level, and, together with the
arbitrariness and accident which this sphere contains as well,
they have as their inevitable consequence disparities of individual
resources and ability.

 Remark: The objective right of the particularity
of mind is contained in the Idea. Men are made unequal by nature,
where inequality is in its element, and in civil society the right
of particularity is so far from annulling this natural inequality
that it produces it out of mind and raises it to an inequality
of skill and resources, and even to one of moral and intellectual
attainment. To oppose to this right a demand for equality is
a folly of the Understanding which takes as real and rational
its abstract equality and its ‘ought-to-be'.

This sphere of particularity, which fancies itself the universal,
is still only relatively identical with the universal, and consequently
it still retains in itself the particularity of nature, i.e. arbitrariness,
or in other words the relics of the state of nature. Further,
it is reason, immanent in the restless system of human needs,
which articulates it into an organic whole with different members
(see the following §).

 &sect; 201

The infinitely complex, criss-cross, movements of reciprocal
production and exchange, and the equally infinite multiplicity
of means therein employed, become crystallised, owing to the universality
inherent in their content, and distinguished into general groups.
 As a result, the entire complex is built up into particular systems
of needs, means, and types of work relative to these needs, modes
of satisfaction and of theoretical and practical education, i.e.
into systems, to one or other of which individuals are assigned - in
other words, into class-divisions.

 Addition: The ways and means of sharing in the
capital of society are left to each man's particular choice, but
the subdivision of civil society into different general branches
is a necessity. The family is the first precondition of the state,
but class divisions are the second. The importance of the latter
is due to the fact that although private persons are self-seeking,
they are compelled to direct their attention to others. Here
then is the root which connects self-seeking to the universal,
i.e. to the state, whose care it must be that this tie is a hard
and fast one.

 &sect; 202

The classes are specifically determined in accordance with
the concept as

 (a) the substantial or immediate [or agricultural] class;

 (b) the reflecting or formal [or business] class; and finally,

 (c) the universal class [the class of civil servants].

 &sect; 203

 (a) The substantial [or agricultural] class has its
capital in the natural products of the soil which it cultivates - soil
which is capable of exclusively private ownership and which demands
formation in an objective way and not mere haphazard exploitation.
 In face of the connection of [agricultural] labour and its fruits
with separate and fixed times of the year, and the dependence
of harvests on the variability of natural processes, the aim of
need in this class turns into provision for the future; but owing
to the conditions here, the agricultural mode of subsistence remains
one which owes comparatively little to reflection and independence
of will, and this mode of life is in general such that this class
has the substantial disposition of an ethical life which is immediate,
resting on family relationship and trust.

 Remark: The real beginning and original foundation
of states has been rightly ascribed to the introduction of agriculture
along with marriage, because the principle of agriculture brings
with it the formation of the land and consequentially exclusively
private property (compare Remark to § 170 );
the nomadic life of savages, who seek their livelihood from place to place, it
brings back to the tranquillity of private rights and the assured
satisfaction of their needs. Along with these changes, sexual
love is restricted to marriage, and this bond in turn grows into
an enduring league, inherently universal, while needs expand into
care for a family, and personal possessions into family goods.
 Security, consolidation, lasting satisfaction of needs, and so
forth - things which are the most obvious recommendations of marriage
and agriculture - are nothing but forms of universality, modes in
which rationality, the final end and aim, asserts itself in these
spheres.

In this matter, nothing is of more interest than the ingenious
and learned explanations which my distinguished friend, Herr Creuzer,
has given of the agrarian festivals, images, and sanctuaries of
the ancients. He shows that it was because the ancients themselves
had become conscious of the divine origin of agriculture and other
institutions associated with it that they held them in such religious
veneration.

In course of time, the character of this class as ‘substantial'
undergoes modifications through the working of the civil law,
in particular the administration of justice, as well as through
the working of education, instruction, and religion. These modifications,
which occur in the other classes also, do not affect the substantial
content of the class but only its form and the development of
its power of reflection.

 Addition: In our day agriculture is conducted
on methods devised by reflective thinking, i.e. like a factory.
This has given it a character like that of industry and contrary
to its natural one. Still, the agricultural class will always
retain a mode of life which is patriarchal and the substantial
frame of mind proper to such a life. The member of this class
accepts unreflectively what is given him and takes what he gets,
thanking God for it and living in faith and confidence that this
goodness will continue. What comes to him suffices him; once
it is consumed, more comes again. This is the simple attitude
of mind not concentrated on the struggle for riches. It may be
described as the attitude of the old nobility which just ate what
there was. So far as this class is concerned, nature does the
major part, while individual effort is secondary. In the business
class, however, it is intelligence which is the essential thing,
and natural products can be treated only as raw materials.

 &sect; 204

 (b) The business class has for its task
the adaptation of raw materials, and for its means of livelihood
it is thrown back on its work, on reflection and intelligence,
and essentially on the mediation of one man's needs and labour with
those of others. For what this class produces and enjoys, it
has mainly itself, its own industry, to thank. The task of this
class is subdivided into:

 [a] work to satisfy single needs in a comparatively concrete way and to supply single orders - craftsmanship;

 [b] work of a more abstract kind, mass-production to satisfy single needs, but needs in more universal demand - manufacture;

 [c] the business of exchange, whereby separate utilities are exchanged the one for the other, principally through the use of the universal medium of exchange, money, which actualises the abstract value of all commodities - trade.

 Addition: In the business class, the individual
is thrown back on himself, and this feeling of self-hood is most
intimately connected with the demand for law and order. The sense
of freedom and order has therefore arisen above all in towns.
 The agricultural class, on the other hand, has little occasion
to think of itself; what it obtains is the gift of a stranger,
of nature. Its feeling of dependence is fundamental to it, and
with this feeling there is readily associated a willingness to
submit to whatever may befall it at other men's hands. The agricultural
class is thus more inclined to subservience, the business class
to freedom.

 &sect; 205

 (c) The universal class [the class of civil
servants] has for its task the universal interests of the community.
 It must therefore be relieved from direct labour to supply its
needs, either by having private means or by receiving an allowance
from the state which claims its industry, with the result that
private interest finds its satisfaction in its work for the universal.

 &sect; 206

It is in accordance with the concept that class-organisation,
as particularity become objective to itself, is split in this
way into its general divisions. But the question of the particular
class to which an individual is to belong is one on which natural
capacity, birth, and other circumstances have their influence,
though the essential and final determining factors are subjective
opinion and the individual's arbitrary will, which win in this
sphere their right, their merit, and their dignity. Hence what
happens here by inner necessity occurs at the same time by the
mediation of the arbitrary will, and to the conscious subject
it has the shape of being the work of his own will.

 Remark: In this respect too there is a conspicuous
difference, in relation to the principle of particularity and
the subject's arbitrary will, between the political life of the
east and the west, and also between that of the ancient and the
modern world. In the former, the division of the whole into classes
came about objectively of itself, because it is inherently rational;
but the principle of subjective particularity was at the same
time denied its rights, in that, for example, the allotment of
individuals to classes was left to the ruling class, as in Plato's
 Republic, or to the accident of birth, as in the Indian
caste-system. Thus subjective particularity was not incorporated
into the organisation of society as a whole; it was not reconciled
in the whole, and therefore - since as an essential moment it emerges
there in any event - it shows itself there as something hostile,
as a corruption of the social order (see Remark to § 185 )Either
it overthrows society, as happened in the Greek states and in
the Roman Republic; or else, should society preserve itself in
being as a force or as a religious authority, for instance, it
appears as inner corruption and complete degeneration, as was
the case to some extent in Sparta and is now altogether the case
in India.

But when subjective particularity is upheld by the objective order
in conformity with it and is at the same time allowed its rights,
then it becomes the animating principle of the entire civil society,
of the development alike of mental activity, merit, and dignity.
 The recognition and the right that what is brought about by reason
of necessity in civil society and the state shall at the same
time be effected by the mediation of the arbitrary will is the
more precise definition of what is primarily meant by freedom
in common parlance (see § 121 ).

 &sect; 207

A man actualises himself only in becoming something definite,
i.e. something specifically particularised; this means restricting
himself exclusively to one of the particular spheres of need.
 In this class-system, the ethical frame of mind therefore is
rectitude and esprit de corps , i.e. the disposition to make oneself
a member of one of the moments of civil society by one's own act,
through one's energy, industry, and skill, to maintain oneself
in this position, and to fend for oneself only through this process
of mediating oneself with the universal, while in this way gaining
recognition both in one's own eyes and in the eyes of others.
 Morality has its proper place in this sphere where the paramount
thing is reflection on one's doings, and the quest of happiness
and private wants, and where the contingency in satisfying these
makes into a duty even a single and contingent act of assistance.

 Remark: At first (i.e. especially in youth) a
man chafes at the idea of resolving on a particular social position,
and looks upon this as a restriction on his universal character
and as a necessity imposed on him purely ab extra. This
is because his thinking is still of that abstract kind which refuses
to move beyond the universal and so never reaches the actual.
 It does not realise that if the concept is to be determinate,
it must first of all advance into the distinction between the
concept and its real existence and thereby into determinacy and particularity
(see § 7 ) - It is only thus that the concept
can win actuality and ethical objectivity.

 Addition: When we say that a man must be a ‘somebody',
we mean that he should belong to some specific social class, since
to be a somebody means to have substantive being. A man with
no class is a mere private person and his universality is not
actualised. On the other hand, the individual in his particularity
may take himself as the universal and presume that by entering
a class he is surrendering himself to an indignity. This is the
false idea that in attaining a determinacy necessary to it, a
thing is restricting and surrendering itself.

 &sect; 208

As the private particularity of knowing and willing, the
principle of this system of needs contains absolute universality,
the universality of freedom, only abstractly and therefore as
the right of property. At this point, however, this right is
no longer merely implicit but has attained its recognised actuality
as the protection of property through the administration of justice.

 B. Administration of Justice

 a: Right as Law b: Determinate Law c: Courts

 &sect; 209

The relatedness arising from the reciprocal bearing on one
another of needs and labour to satisfy these is first of all reflected
into itself as infinite personality, as abstract right. But it
is this very sphere of relatedness - a sphere of education, which
gives abstract right the determinate existence of being something
universally recognised, known, and willed, and having a validity
and an objective actuality mediated by this known and willed character.

 Remark: It is part of education, of thinking
as the consciousness of the single in the form of universality,
that the ego comes to be apprehended as a universal person in
which all are identical. A man counts as a man in virtue of
his manhood alone, not because he is a Jew, Catholic, Protestant,
German, Italian, &c. This is an assertion which thinking
ratifies and to be conscious of it is of infinite importance.
 It is defective only when it is crystallised, e.g. as a cosmopolitanism
in opposition to the concrete life of the state.

 Addition: From one point of view, it is through
the working of the system of particularity that right becomes
an external compulsion as a protection of particular interests.
 Even though this result is due to the concept, right none the
less only becomes something existent because this is useful for
men's needs. To become conscious in thought of his right, man
must be trained to think and give up dallying with mere sensation.
 We must invest the objects of our thought with the form of universality
and similarly we must direct our willing by a universal principle.
 It is only after man has devised numerous needs and after their
acquisition has become intertwined with his satisfaction, that
he can frame laws for himself.

 &sect; 210

The objective actuality of the right consists, first, in
its existence for consciousness, in its being known in some way
or other; secondly, in its possessing the power which the actual
possesses, in its being valid, and so also in its becoming known
as universally valid.

 (a) Right as Law

 &sect; 211

The principle of rightness becomes the law ( Gesetz ) when,
in its objective existence, it is posited ( gesetzt ), i.e. when
thinking makes it determinate for consciousness and makes it known
as what is right and valid; and in acquiring this determinate
character, the right becomes positive law in general.

 Remark: To posit something as universal, i.e.
to bring it before consciousness as universal, is, I need hardly
say, to think (compare Remarks to §§ 13 and 21 ). Thereby
its content is reduced to its simplest form and so is given its
final determinacy. In becoming law, what is right acquires for the first time
not only the form proper to its universality, but also its determinacy.
 Hence making a law is not to be represented as merely the expression
of a rule of behaviour valid for everyone, though that is one
moment in legislation; the more important moment, the inner essence
of the matter, is knowledge of the content of the law in its determinate
universality.

Since it is only animals which have their law as instinct, while
it is man alone who has law as custom, even systems of customary
law contain the moment of being thoughts and being known. Their
difference from positive law consists solely in this, that they
are known only in a subjective and accidental way, with the result
that in themselves they are less determinate and the universality
of thought is less clear in them. (And apart from this, knowledge
of a system of law either in general or in its details, is the
accidental possession of a few.) The supposition that it is customary
law, on the strength of its character as custom, which possesses
the privilege of having become part of life is a delusion, since
the valid laws of a nation do not cease to be its customs by being
written and codified - and besides, it is as a rule precisely
those versed in the deadest of topics and the deadest of thoughts
who talk nowadays of ‘life' and of ‘becoming part of life'. When
a nation begins to acquire even a little culture, its customary
law must soon come to be collected and put together. Such a collection
is a legal code, but one which, as a mere collection, is markedly
formless, indeterminate, and fragmentary. The main difference
between it and a code properly so-called is that in the latter
the principles of jurisprudence in their universality, and so
in their determinacy, have been apprehended in terms of thought
and expressed. English national law or municipal law is contained,
as is well known, in statutes (written laws) and in so-called
‘unwritten' laws. This unwritten law, however, is as good as written,
and knowledge of it may, and indeed must, be acquired simply by
reading the numerous quartos which it fills. The monstrous confusion,
however, which prevails both in English law and its administration
is graphically portrayed by those acquainted with the matter.
 In particular, they comment on the fact that, since this unwritten
law is contained in court verdicts and judgments, the judges are
continually legislators. The authority of precedent is binding
on them, since their predecessors have done nothing but give expression
to the unwritten law; and yet they are just as much exempt from
its authority, because they are themselves repositories of the
unwritten law and so have the right to criticise previous judgments
and pronounce whether they accorded with the unwritten law or
not.

A similar confusion might have arisen in the legal system of the
later Roman Empire owing to the different but authoritative judgments
of all the famous jurists. An Emperor met the situation, however,
by a sensible expedient when, by what was called the Law of Citations,
he set up a kind of College of the jurists who were longest deceased. There was a President, and the majority vote was accepted.

No greater insult could be offered to a civilised people or to
its lawyers than to deny them ability to codify their law; for
such ability cannot be that of constructing a legal system with
a novel content, but only that of apprehending, i.e. grasping
in thought, the content of existing laws in its determinate universality
and then applying them to particular cases.

 Addition: The sun and the planets have their
laws too, but they do not know them. Savages are governed by
impulses, customs, and feelings, but they are unconscious of this.
 When right is posited as law and is known, every accident of
feeling vanishes together with the form of revenge, sympathy,
and selfishness, and in this way the right attains for the first
time its true determinacy and is given its due honour. It is
as a result of the discipline of comprehending the right that
the right first becomes capable of universality. In the course
of applying the laws, clashes occur, and in dealing with these
the judge's intelligence has its proper scope; this is quite inevitable,
because otherwise carrying out the law would be something mechanical
from start to finish. But to go so far as to get rid of clashes
altogether by leaving much to the judge's discretion is a far
worse solution, because even the clash is intrinsic to thought,
to conscious thinking and its dialectic, while the mere fiat of
a judge would be arbitrary.

It is generally alleged in favour of customary law that it is
‘living', but this vitality, i.e. the identity between the subject
and what the law provides, is not the whole essence of the matter.
 Law ( Recht ) must be known by thought, it must be
a system in itself, and only as such can it be recognised in a
civilised country. The recent denial that nations ‘have a vocation
to codify their laws' is not only an insult; it also implies the
absurdity of supposing that not a single individual has been endowed
with skill enough to bring into a coherent system the endless
mass of existing laws. The truth is that it is just systematisation,
i.e. elevation to the universal, which our time is pressing for
without any limit. A similar view is that collections of judgments,
like those available in a Corpus Juris, are far superior
to a code worked out in the most general way. The reason alleged
is that such judgments always retain a certain particularity
and a certain reminiscence of history which men are unwilling
to sacrifice. But the mischievousness of such collections is
made clear enough by the practice of English law.

 &sect; 212

It is only because of this identity between its implicit
and its posited character that positive law has obligatory force
in virtue of its rightness. In being posited in positive law,
the right acquires determinate existence. Into such existence
there may enter the contingency of self-will and other particular
circumstances and hence there may be a discrepancy between the
content of the law and the principle of rightness.

 Remark: In positive law, therefore, it is the
legal which is the source of our knowledge of what is right, or,
more exactly, of our legal rights ( Rechtens ). Thus
the science of positive law is to that extent an historical science
with authority as its guiding principle. Anything over and above
this historical study is matter for the Understanding and concerns
the collection of laws, their classification on external principles,
deductions from them, their application to fresh details, &c.
 When the Understanding meddles with the nature of the thing itself,
its theories, e.g. of criminal law, show what its deductive argumentation
can concoct.

The science of positive law has not only the right, but even the
inescapable duty, to study given laws, to deduce from its positive
data their progress in history, their applications and subdivisions,
down to the last detail, and to exhibit their implications. On
the other hand, if, after all these deductions have been proved,
the further question about the rationality of a specific law is
still raised, the question may seem perverse to those who are
busied with these pursuits, but their astonishment at it should
at least stop short of dismay.

With this Remark, compare what was said in the Remark to § 3 about ‘understanding' the law.

 &sect; 213

Right becomes determinate in the first place when it has the form of being posited as positive law; it also becomes determinate in content by being applied both to the material of civil society (i.e. to the endlessly growing complexity and subdivision of social ties and the different species of property and contract within the society) and also to ethical ties based on the heart, on love and trust, though only in so far as these involve abstract right as one of their aspects (see § 159 ) - Morality and moral commands concern the will on its most private, subjective, and particular side, and so cannot be a matter for positive legislation. Further material for the determinate content of law is provided by the rights and duties which have their source in the administration of justice itself, in the state, and so forth.

 Addition: In the higher relationships of marriage,
love, religion, and the state, the only aspects which can become
the subject of legislation are those of such a nature as to permit
of their being in principle external. Still, in this respect
there is a wide difference between the laws of different peoples.
 The Chinese, for instance, have a law requiring a husband to
love his first wife more than his other wives. If he is convicted
of doing the opposite, corporal punishment follows. Similarly,
the legislation of the ancients in earlier times was full of precepts
about uprightness and integrity which are unsuited by nature to
legal enactment because they fall wholly within the field of the
inner life. It is only in the case of the oath, whereby things
are brought home to conscience, that uprightness and integrity
must be taken into account as the substance of the matter.

 &sect; 214

But apart from being applied to particular instances, right
by being embodied in positive law becomes applicable to the single
case. Hence it enters the sphere where quantity, not the concept,
is the principle of determination. This is the sphere of the
quantitative as such, of the quantitative as that which determines
the relative value in exchange of qualia . In this sphere, the
concept merely lays down a general limit, within which vacillation
is still allowed. This vacillation must be terminated, however,
in the interest of getting something done, and for this reason
there is a place within that limit for contingent and arbitrary
decisions.

 Remark: The purely positive side of law lies
chiefly in this focusing of the universal not merely on a particular
instance, but on an isolated case, i.e. in its direct application.
 Reason cannot determine, nor can the concept provide any principle
whose application could decide whether justice requires for an
offence (i) a corporal punishment of forty lashes or thirty-nine,
or (ii) a fine of five dollars or four dollars ninety-three, four,
&c., cents, or (iii) imprisonment of a year or three hundred
and sixty-four, three, &c., days, or a year and one, two,
or three days. And yet injustice is done at once if there is
one lash too many, or one dollar or one cent, one week in prison
or one day, too many or too few.

Reason itself requires us to recognise that contingency, contradiction,
and show have a sphere and a right of their own, restricted though
it be, and it is irrational to strive to resolve and rectify contradictions
within that sphere. Here the only interest present is that something
be actually done, that the matter be settled and decided somehow,
no matter how (within a certain limit). This decision pertains
to abstract subjectivity, to formal self-certainty, which may
decide either by simply holding to its power (within that limit)
of settling the matter by merely terminating deliberation and
thereby dismissing it out of hand, or else by adopting some reason
for decision such as keeping to round numbers or always adopting,
say thirty-nine.

It is true that the law does not settle these ultimate decisions
required by actual life; it leaves them instead to the judge's
discretion, merely limiting him by a maximum and minimum. But
this does not affect the point at issue, because the maximum and
minimum are themselves in every instance only round numbers once
more. To fix them, therefore, does not exempt the judge from
making a finite, purely positive, decision, since on the contrary
such a decision is still left to him by the necessities of the
case.

 Addition: There is one essential element in law
and the administration of justice which contains a measure of
contingency and which arises from the fact that the law is a universal
prescription which has to be applied to the single case. If you
wished to declare yourself against this contingency, you would
be talking in abstractions. The measure of a man's punishment,
for example, cannot be made equivalent to any determination of
the concept of punishment, and the decision made, whatever it
be, is from this point of view arbitrary always. But this contingency
is itself necessary, and if you argue against having a code at
all on the ground that any code is incomplete, you are overlooking
just that element of law in which completion is not to be achieved
and which therefore must just be accepted as it stands.

 (b) Law determinately existent

 &sect; 215

If laws are to have a binding force, it follows that, in
view of the right of self-consciousness
(see § 132 and the
Remark thereto) they must be made universally known.

 Remark: To hang the laws so high that no citizen
could read them (as Dionysius the Tyrant did) is injustice of
one and the same kind as to bury them in row upon row of learned
tomes, collections of dissenting judgments and opinions, records
of customs, &c., and in a dead language too, so that knowledge
of the law of the land is accessible only to those who have made
it their professional study. Rulers who have given a national
law to their peoples in the form of a well-arranged and clear-cut
legal code or even a mere formless collection of laws, like Justinian's - have
been the greatest benefactors of their peoples and have received
thanks and praise for their beneficence. But the truth is that
their work was at the same time a great act of justice.

 Addition: The legal profession, possessed of
a special knowledge of the law, often claims this knowledge as
its monopoly and refuses to allow any layman to discuss the subject.
 Physicists similarly have taken amiss Goethe's theory about colours
because he did not belong to their craft and was a poet into the
bargain. But we do not need to be shoemakers to know if our shoes
fit, and just as little have we any need to be professionals to
acquire knowledge of matters of universal interest. Law is concerned
with freedom, the worthiest and holiest thing in man, the thing
man must know if it is to have obligatory force for him.

 &sect; 216

For a public legal code, simple general laws are required,
and yet the nature of the finite material to which law is applied
leads to the further determining of general laws ad infinitum .
 On the one hand, the law ought to be a comprehensive whole, closed
and complete; and yet, on the other hand, the need for further
determinations is continual. But since this antinomy arises only
when universal principles, which remain fixed and unchanged, are
applied to particular types of case, the right to a complete legal
code remains unimpaired, like the right that these simple general
principles should be capable of being laid down and understood
apart and in distinction from their application to such particular
types.

 Remark: A fruitful source of complexity in legislation
is the gradual intrusion of reason, of what is inherently and
actually right, into primitive institutions which have something
wrong at their roots and so are purely historical survivals.
This occurred in Roman law, as was remarked above (see Remark to § 180 ), in medieval feudal law, &c. It is essential to notice, however, that the very nature of the finite material
to which law is applied necessarily entails an infinite progress
in the application to it of principles universal in themselves
and inherently and actually rational.

It is misunderstanding which has given rise alike to the demand - a
morbid craving of German scholars chiefly - that a legal code
should be something absolutely complete, incapable of any fresh
determination in detail, and also to the argument that because
a code is incapable of such completion, therefore we ought not
to produce something ‘incomplete', i.e. we ought not to produce
a code at all. The misunderstanding rests in both cases on a
misconception of the nature of a finite subject-matter like
private law, whose so-called ‘completeness' is a perennial approximation
to completeness, on a misconception of the differences between
the universal of reason and the universal of the Understanding,
and also in the application of the latter to the material of finitude
and atomicity which goes on for ever. - Le plus grand ennemi
du Bien, c'est le Meilleur is the utterance of true common
sense against the common sense of idle argumentation and abstract
reflection.

 Addition: Completeness means the exhaustive collection
of every single thing, pertaining to a given field, and no science
or branch of knowledge can be complete in this sense. Now, if
we say that philosophy or any one of the sciences is incomplete,
we are not far from holding that we must wait until the deficiency
is made up, since the best part may still be wanting. But take
up this attitude and advance is impossible, either in geometry,
which seems to be a closed science although new propositions do
arise, or in philosophy, which is always capable of freshness
in detail even though its subject is the universal Idea. In the
past, the universal law always consisted of the ten commandments;
now we can see at once that not to lay down the law ‘Thou shalt
not kill', on the ground that a legal code cannot be complete,
is an obvious absurdity. Any code could be still better - no
effort of reflection is required to justify this affirmation;
we can think of the best, finest, and noblest as still better,
finer, and nobler. But a big old tree puts forth more and more
branches without thereby becoming a new tree; though it would
be silly to refuse to plant a tree at all simply because it might
produce new branches.

 &sect; 217

The principle of rightness passes over in civil society
into law. My individual right, whose embodiment has hitherto been
immediate and abstract, now similarly becomes embodied in the
existent will and knowledge of everyone, in the sense that it
becomes recognised. Hence property acquisitions and transfers
must now be undertaken and concluded only in the form which that
embodiment gives to them. In civil society, property rests on
contract and on the formalities which make ownership capable of
proof and valid in law.

 Remark: Original, i.e. direct, titles and means
of acquisition (see §§ 54 ff. ) are simply discarded in civil society and appear only as isolated accidents or as subordinated
factors of property transactions. It is either feeling, refusing
to move beyond the subjective, or reflection, clinging to its
abstract essences, which casts formalities aside, while the dry-as-dust
Understanding may for its part cling to formalities instead of
the real thing and multiply them indefinitely.

Apart from this, however, the march of mental development is the
long and hard struggle to free a content from its sensuous and
immediate form, endow it with its appropriate form of thought,
and thereby give it simple and adequate expression. It is because
this is the case that when the development of law is just beginning,
ceremonies and formalities are more circumstantial and count rather
as the thing itself than as its symbol. Thus even in Roman law,
a number of forms and especially phrases were retained from old-fashioned
ceremonial usages, instead of being replaced by intelligible forms
and phrases adequately expressing them.

 Addition: Law and the right are identical in
the sense that what is implicitly right is posited in the law.
 I possess something, own a property, which I occupied when it
was ownerless. This possession must now further be recognised
and posited as mine. Hence in civil society formalities arise
in connection with property. Boundary stones are erected as a
symbol for others to recognise. Entries are made in mortgage
and property registers. Most property in civil society is held
on contract, and contractual forms are fixed and determinate.
 Now we may have an antipathy to formalities of this kind and
we may suppose that they only exist to bring in money to the authorities;
we may even regard them as something offensive and a sign of mistrust
because they impair the validity of the saying: ‘A man is as good
as his word.' But the formality is essential because what is inherently
right must also be posited as right. My will is a rational will;
it has validity, and its validity should be recognised by others.
 At this point, then, my subjectivity and that of others must
be set aside and the will must achieve the security, stability,
and objectivity which can be attained only through such formalities.

 &sect; 218

Since property and personality have legal recognition and
validity in civil society, wrongdoing now becomes an infringement,
not merely of what is subjectively infinite, but of the universal
thing which is existent with inherent stability and strength.
 Hence a new attitude arises: the action is seen as a danger to
society and thereby the magnitude of the wrongdoing is increased.
On the other hand, however, the fact that society has become strong
and sure of itself diminishes the external importance of the injury
and so leads to a mitigation of its punishment.

 Remark: The fact that an injury to one member
of society is an injury to all others does not alter the conception
of wrongdoing, but it does alter it in respect of its outward
existence as an injury done, an injury which now affects the mind
and consciousness of civil society as a whole, not merely the
external embodiment of the person directly injured. In heroic
times, as we see in the tragedy of the ancients, the citizens
did not feel themselves injured by wrongs which members of the
royal houses did to one another.

Implicitly, crime is an infinite injury; but as an existent fact
it must be measured in quantity and quality (see § 96 ),
and since its field of existence here has the essential character
of affecting an idea and consciousness of the validity of the
laws, its danger to civil society is a determinant of the magnitude
of a crime, or even one of its qualitative characteristics.

Now this quality or magnitude varies with the state of civil society;
and this is the justification for sometimes attaching the penalty
of death to a theft of a few pence or a turnip, and at other times
a light penalty to a theft of a hundred or more times that amount.
 If we consider its danger to society, this seems at first sight
to aggravate the crime; but in fact it is just this which has
been the prime cause of the mitigation of its punishment. A penal
code, then, is primarily the child of its age and the state of
civil society at the time.

 Addition: It seems to be a contradiction that
a crime committed in society appears more heinous and yet is punished
more leniently. But while it would be impossible for society
to leave a crime unpunished, since that would be to posit it as
right, still since society is sure of itself, a crime must always
be something idiosyncratic in comparison, something unstable and
exceptional. The very stability of society gives a crime the
status of something purely subjective which seems to be the product
rather of natural impulse than of a prudent will. In this light,
crime acquires a milder status, and for this reason its punishment
too becomes milder. If society is still internally weak, then
an example must be made by inflicting punishments, since punishment
is itself an example over against the example of crime. But in
a society which is internally strong, the commission of crime
is something so feeble that its annulment must be commensurable
with its feebleness. Harsh punishments, therefore, are not unjust
in and by themselves; they are related to contemporary conditions.
 A criminal code cannot hold good for all time, and crimes are
only shows of reality which may draw on themselves a greater or
lesser degree of disavowal.

 (c) The Court of Justice

 &sect; 219

By taking the form of law, right steps into a determinate
mode of being. It is then something on its own account, and in
contrast with particular willing and opining of the right, it
is self-subsistent and has to vindicate itself as something universal.
This is achieved by recognising it and making it actual in a particular
case without the subjective feeling of private interest; and this
is the business of a public authority - the court of justice.

 Remark: The historical origin of the judge and
his court may have had the form of a patriarch's gift to his people
or of force or free choice; but this makes no difference to the
concept of the thing. To regard the introduction of a legal system
as no more than an optional act of grace or favour on the part
of monarchs and governments (as Herr von Haller does in his Restauration
der Staatswissenschaft ) is a piece of the mere thoughtlessness
which has no inkling of the point at issue in a discussion of
law and the state. The point is that legal and political institutions
are rational in principle and therefore absolutely necessary,
and the question of the form in which they arose or were introduced
is entirely irrelevant to a consideration of their rational basis.

At the other extreme from Herr von Haller's point of view is the
barbarous notion that the administration of justice is now, as
it was in the days when might was right, an improper exercise
of force, a suppression of freedom, and a despotism. The administration
of justice must be regarded as the fulfilment of a duty by the
public authority, no less than as the exercise of a right; and
so far as it is a right, it does not depend upon an optional delegation
to one authority by the individual members of society.

 &sect; 220

When the right against crime has the form of revenge (see
 § 102 ), it is only right implicit, not right in the form of right, i.e. no act of revenge is justified. Instead of the
injured party, the injured universal now comes on the scene, and
this has its proper actuality in the court of law. It takes over
the pursuit and the avenging of crime, and this pursuit consequently
ceases to be the subjective and contingent retribution of revenge
and is transformed into the genuine reconciliation of right with
itself, i.e. into punishment. Objectively, this is the reconciliation
of the law with itself; by the annulment of the crime, the law
is restored and its authority is thereby actualised. Subjectively,
it is the reconciliation of the criminal with himself, i.e. with
the law known by him as his own and as valid for him and his protection;
when this law is executed upon him, he himself finds in this process
the satisfaction of justice and nothing save his own act.

 &sect; 221

A member of civil society has the right in judicio stare
and, correspondingly, the duty of acknowledging the jurisdiction
of the court and accepting its decision as final when his own
rights are in dispute.

 Addition: Since any individual has the right
 in judicio stare, he must also know what the law is or
otherwise this privilege would be useless to him. But it is also
his duty to stand his trial. Under the feudal system,
the nobles often refused to stand their trial. They defied the
court and alleged that the court was wrong to demand their appearance.
 Feudal conditions, however, contravened the very idea of a court.
 Nowadays monarchs have to recognise the jurisdiction of the court
in their private affairs, and in free states they commonly lose
their case.

 &sect; 222

In court the specific character which rightness acquires
is that it must be demonstrable. When parties go to law, they
are put in the position of having to make good their evidence
and their claims and to make the judge acquainted with the facts.
 These steps in a legal process are themselves rights, and their
course must therefore be fixed by law. They also constitute an
essential part of jurisprudence.

 Addition: A man may be indignant if a right which
he knows he has is refused him because he cannot prove it. But
if I have a right, it must at the same time be a right posited
in law. I must be able to explain and prove it, and its validity
can only be recognised in society if its rightness in principle
is also made a posited rightness in law.

 &sect; 223

These steps in a legal process are subdivided continually
within no fixed limits into more and more actions, each being
distinct in itself and a right. Hence a legal process, in itself
in any case a means, now begins to be something external to its
end and contrasted with it. This long course of formalities is
a right of the parties at law and they have the right to traverse
it from beginning to end. Still, it may be turned into an evil,
and even an instrument of wrong, and for this reason it is by
law made the duty of the parties to submit themselves to the simple
process of arbitration (before a tribunal of arbitrators) and
to the attempt to reconcile their differences out of court, in
order that they - and right itself, as the substance of the thing
and so the thing really at issue - may be protected against legal
processes and their misuse.

 Remark: Equity involves a departure from formal
rights owing to moral or other considerations and is concerned
primarily with the content of the lawsuit. A court of equity,
however, comes to mean a court which decides in a single case
without insisting on the formalities of a legal process or, in
particular, on the objective evidence which the letter of the
law may require. Further, it decides on the merits of the single
case as a unique one, not with a view to disposing of it in such
a way as to create a binding legal precedent for the future.

 &sect; 224

Amongst the rights of the subjective consciousness are not
only the publication of the laws (see § 215 ) but also the
possibility of ascertaining the actualisation of the law in a
particular case (the course of the proceedings, the legal argument,
&c.) - i.e. the publicity of judicial proceedings. The reason
for this is that a trial is implicitly an event of universal validity,
and although the particular content of the action affects the
interests of the parties alone, its universal content, i.e. the
right at issue and the judgment thereon, affects the interests
of everybody.

 Remark: If the members of the bench deliberate
amongst themselves about the judgment which they are to deliver,
such deliberations express opinions and views still personal and
so naturally are not public.

 Addition: It is straightforward common sense
to hold that the publicity of legal proceedings is right and just.
 A strong reason against such publicity has always been the rank
of justices; they are unwilling to sit in public and they regard
themselves as a sanctuary of law which laymen are not to enter.
 But an integral part of justice is the confidence which citizens
have in it, and it is this which requires that proceedings shall
be public. The right of publicity depends on the fact that (i)
the aim of the court is justice, which as universal falls under
the cognisance of everyone, and (ii) it is through publicity that
the citizens become convinced that the judgment was actually
just.

 &sect; 225

By the judgment of the court, the law is applied to a single
case, and the work of judgment has two distinct aspects: first,
ascertainment of the nature of the case as a unique, single, occurrence
(e.g. whether a contract, &c., &c., has been made, whether
a trespass has been committed, and if so by whom) and, in criminal
cases, reflection to determine the essential, criminal, character
of the deed (see Remark to § 119 );
secondly, the subsumption of the case under the law that right must be restored. Punishment
in criminal cases is a conception falling under this law. Decisions
on these two different aspects are given by different functionaries.

 Remark: In the Roman judicial system, this distinction
of functions appeared in that the Praetor pronounced judgment
on the assumption that the facts were so and so, and then appointed
a special judex to inquire into the facts.

In English law, it is left to the insight or option of the prosecutor
to determine the precise character of a criminal act (e.g. whether
it is murder or manslaughter) and the court is powerless to alter
the indictment if it finds the prosecutor's choice wrong.

 &sect; 226

First, the conduct of the entire process of inquiry, secondly,
the detailed stages of the action between the parties (these stages
themselves being rights - see § 222 ), and then also the second
of the aspects of the work of judgment mentioned in the previous
paragraph, are all a task which properly belongs to the judge
at law. He is the organ of the law, and the case must be prepared
for him in such a way as to make possible its subsumption under
some principle; that is to say, it must be stripped of its apparent,
empirical, character and exalted into a recognised fact of a general
type.

 &sect; 227

The first aspect of the work of judgment, i.e. the knowledge
of the facts of the case as a unique, single, occurrence, and
the description of its general character, involves in itself
no pronouncement on points of law. This is knowledge attainable
by any educated man. In settling the character of an action,
the subjective moment, i.e. the agent's insight and intention
(see the Second Part), is the essential thing; and apart from
this, the proof depends not on objects of reason or abstractions
of the Understanding, but only on single details and circumstances,
objects of sensuous intuition and subjective certainty, and therefore
does not contain in itself any absolute, objective, probative
factor. It follows that judgment on the facts lies in the last
resort with subjective conviction and conscience ( animi sententia ),
while the proof, resting as it does on the statements and affidavits
of others, receives its final though purely subjective verification
from the oath.

 Remark: In this matter it is of the first importance
to fix our eyes on the type of proof here in question and to distinguish
it from knowledge and proof of another sort. To establish by
proof a rational category, like the concept of right itself, means
to apprehend its necessity, and so demands a method other than
that requisite for the proof of a geometrical theorem. Further,
in this latter case, the figure is determined by the Understanding
and made abstract in advance according to a rule. But in the
case of something empirical in content, like a fact, the material
of knowledge is a given sensuous intuition and subjective sense-certainty,
and statements and affidavits about such material. It is then
a question of drawing conclusions and putting two and two together
out of depositions of that kind, attestations and other details,
&c. The objective truth which emerges from material of this
kind and the method appropriate to it leads, when attempts are
made to determine it rigidly and objectively, to half-proofs and
then, by further sincere deductions from these - deductions which
at the same time involve formal illogicality - to extraordinary
punishments. But such objective truth means something quite
different from the truth of a rational category or a proposition
whose content the Understanding has determined for itself abstractly
in advance. To show that, since the strictly legal character
of a court covers competence to ascertain this sort of truth about
empirical events, it thereby properly qualifies a court for this
task and so gives it an inherent exclusive right to perform it
and lays on it the necessity of performing it - that is the best
approach to settling the question of how far decisions on points
of fact, as well as on points of law, should be ascribed to courts
as strictly juristic bodies.

 Addition: No grounds can be adduced for supposing
that the judge, i.e. the legal expert, should be the only person
to establish how the facts lie, for ability to do so depends on
general, not on purely legal, education. Determination of the
facts of the case depends on empirical details, on depositions
about what happened, and on similar perceptual data, or again
on facts from which inferences can be drawn about the deed in
question and which make it probable or improbable. Here then,
it is an assurance which should be required, not truth in the
higher sense in which it is always something eternal. Here such
assurance is subjective conviction, or conscience, and the problem
is: What form should this assurance take in a court of law? The
demand, commonly made in German law, that a criminal should confess
his guilt, has this to be said for it, that the right of self-consciousness
thereby attains a measure of satisfaction; consciousness must
chime in with the judge's sentence, and it is only when the criminal
has confessed that the judgment loses its alien character so
far as he is concerned. But a difficulty arises here, because
the criminal may lie, and the interest of justice may be jeopardised.
 If, on the other hand, the subjective conviction of the judge
is to hold good, some hardship is once more involved, because
the accused is no longer being treated as a free man. Now the
middle term between these extremes is trial by jury, which meets
the demand that the declaration of guilt or innocence shall spring
from the soul of the accused.

 &sect; 228

When judgment is pronounced - so far as the function of judgment
is the subsumption under the law of the case whose nature has
been settled - the right due to the parties on the score of their
self-consciousness is preserved in relation to the law because
the law is known and so is the law of the parties themselves,
and in relation to the subsumption , because the trial is public.
 But when a verdict is given on the particular, subjective, and
external facts of the case (knowledge of which falls under the
first of the aspects described in § 225 ), this right is satisfied
by the confidence which the parties feel in the subjectivity of
those who give the verdict. This confidence is based primarily
on the similarity between them and the parties in respect of their
particularity, i.e. their social position, &c.

 Remark: The right of self-consciousness, the
moment of subjective freedom, may be regarded as the fundamental
thing to keep before us in considering the necessity for publicity
in legal proceedings and for the so-called jury-courts, and this
in the last resort is the essence of whatever may be advanced
in favour of these institutions on the score of their utility.
 Other points of view and reasoning about their several advantages
and disadvantages may give rise to an argumentative exchange,
but reasoning of this kind, like all deductive reasoning, is either
secondary and inconclusive, or else drawn from other and perhaps
higher spheres than that of advantage. It may be the case that
if the administration of justice were entirely in the hands of
professional lawyers, and there were no lay institutions like
juries, it would in theory be managed just as well, if not better.
 It may be so, but even if this possibility rises by general consent
to probability, or even certainty, it still does not matter, for
on the other side there is always the right of self-consciousness,
insisting on its claims and dissatisfied if laymen play no part.

Owing to the character of the entire body of the laws, knowledge
both of what is right and also of the course of legal proceedings
may become, together with the capacity to prosecute an action
at law, the property of a class which makes itself an exclusive
clique by the use of a terminology like a foreign tongue to those
whose rights are at issue. If this happens, the members of civil
society, who depend for their livelihood on their industry, on
their own knowledge and will, are kept strangers to the law, not
only to those parts of it affecting their most personal and intimate
affairs, but also to its substantive and rational basis, the right
itself, and the result is that they become the wards, or even
in a sense the bondsmen, of the legal profession. They may indeed
have the right to appear in court in person and to ‘stand' there
( in judicio stare ), but their bodily presence is
a trifle if their minds are not to be there also, if they are
not to follow the proceedings with their own knowledge, and if
the justice they receive remains in their eyes a doom pronounced
 ab extra.

 &sect; 229

In civil society, the Idea is lost in particularity and
has fallen asunder with the separation of inward and outward.
 In the administration of justice, however, civil society returns
to its concept, to the unity of the implicit universal with the
subjective particular, although here the latter is only that present
in single cases and the universality in question is that of abstract
right. The actualisation of this unity through its extension
to the whole ambit of particularity is (i) the specific function
of the Police, though the unification which it effects is only
relative; (ii) it is the Corporation which actualises the unity
completely, though only in a whole which, while concrete, is restricted.

 Addition: In civil society, universality is necessity
only. When we are dealing with human needs, it is only right
as such which is steadfast. But this right - only a restricted
sphere - has a bearing simply on the protection of property; welfare
is something external to right as such. This welfare, however,
is an essential end in the system of needs. Hence the universal,
which in the first instance is the right only, has to be extended
over the whole field of particularity. Justice is a big thing
in civil society. Given good laws, a state can flourish, and
freedom of property is a fundamental condition of its prosperity.
 Still, since I am inextricably involved in particularity, I have
a right to claim that in this association with other particulars,
my particular welfare too shall be promoted. Regard should be
paid to my welfare, to my particular interest, and this is done
through the Police and the Corporation.

 C. The Public Authorities

 a: Police b: Corporation

 &sect; 230

In the system of needs, the livelihood and welfare of every
single person is a possibility whose actual attainment is just
as much conditioned by his caprices and particular endowment as
by the objective system of needs. Through the administration
of justice, offences against property or personality are annulled.
 But the right actually present in the particular requires, first,
that accidental hindrances to one aim or another be removed, and
undisturbed safety of person and property be attained; and secondly,
that the securing of every single person's livelihood and welfare
be treated and actualised as a right, i.e. that particular welfare
as such be so treated.

 (a) Police [or the public authority]

 &sect; 231

Inasmuch as it is still the particular will which governs
the choice of this or that end, the universal authority by which
security is ensured remains in the first instance, (a) restricted
to the sphere of contingencies, and (b) an external organisation.

 &sect; 232

Crime is contingency as subjective willing of evil, and
this is what the universal authority must prevent or bring to
justice. But, crime apart, the subjective willing which is permissible
in actions lawful per se and in the private use of property, also
comes into external relation with other single persons, as well
as with public institutions, other than law-courts, established
for realising a common end. This universal aspect makes private
actions a matter of contingency which escapes the agent's control
and which either does or may injure others and wrong them.

 &sect; 233

There is here only a possibility of injury; but the actual
non-occurrence of injury is at this stage not just another contingency.
 The point is that the actions of individuals may always be wrongful,
and this is the ultimate reason for police control and penal justice.

 &sect; 234

The relations between external existents fall into the infinite
of the Understanding; there is, therefore, no inherent line of
distinction between what is and what is not injurious, even where
crime is concerned, or between what is and what is not suspicious,
or between what is to be forbidden or subjected to supervision
and what is to be exempt from prohibition, from surveillance and
suspicion, from inquiry and the demand to render an account of
itself. These details are determined by custom, the spirit of
the rest of the constitution, contemporary conditions, the crisis
of the hour, and so forth.

 Addition: Here nothing hard and fast can be laid
down and no absolute lines can be drawn. Everything here is personal;
subjective opinion enters in, and the spirit of the constitution
and the crisis of the day have to provide precision of detail.
 In time of war, for instance, many a thing, harmless at other
times, has to be regarded as harmful. As a result of this presence
of accident, of personal arbitrariness, the public authority acquires
a measure of odium. When reflective thinking is very highly developed,
the public authority may tend to draw into its orbit everything
it possibly can, for in everything some factor may be found which
might make it dangerous in one of its bearings. In such circumstances,
the public authority may set to work very pedantically and embarrass
the day-to-day life of people. But however great this annoyance,
no objective line can be drawn here either.

 &sect; 235

In the indefinite multiplication and interconnection of
day-to-day needs, (a) the acquisition and exchange of the means
to their satisfactions - satisfaction which everyone confidently
expects to be possible of attainment without hindrance, and (b)
the endeavours made and the transactions carried out in order
to shorten the process of attainment as much as possible, give
rise to factors which are a common interest, and when one man
occupies himself with these his labour is at the same time done
for all. The situation is productive too of contrivances and
organisations which may be of use to the community as a whole.
 These universal activities and organisations of general utility
call for the oversight and care of the public authority.

 &sect; 236

The differing interests of producers and consumers may come
into collision with each other; and although a fair balance between
them on the whole may be brought about automatically, still their
adjustment also requires a control which stands above both and
is consciously undertaken. The right to the exercise of such
control in a single case (e.g. in the fixing of the prices of
the commonest necessaries of life) depends on the fact that, by
being publicly exposed for sale, goods in absolutely universal
daily demand are offered not so much to an individual as such
but rather to a universal purchaser, the public; and thus both
the defence of the public's right not to be defrauded, and also
the management of goods inspection, may lie, as a common concern,
with a public authority. But public care and direction are most
of all necessary in the case of the larger branches of industry,
because these are dependent on conditions abroad and on combinations
of distant circumstances which cannot be grasped as a whole by
the individuals tied to these industries for their living.

 Remark: At the other extreme to freedom of trade
and commerce in civil society is public organisation to provide
for everything and determine everyone's labour - take for example
in ancient times the labour on the pyramids and the other huge
monuments in Egypt and Asia which were constructed for public
ends, and the worker's task was not mediated through his private
choice and particular interest. This interest invokes freedom
of trade and commerce against control from above; but the more
blindly it sinks into self-seeking aims, the more it requires
such control to bring it back to the universal. Control is also
necessary to diminish the danger of upheavals arising from clashing
interests and to abbreviate the period in which their tension
should be eased through the working of a necessity of which they
themselves know nothing.

 Addition: The oversight and care exercised by
the public authority aims at being a middle term between an individual
and the universal possibility, afforded by society, of attaining
individual ends. It has to undertake street-lighting, bridge-building,
the pricing of daily necessaries, and the care of public health.
 In this connection, two main views predominate at the present
time. One asserts that the superintendence of everything properly
belongs to the public authority, the other that the public authority
has nothing at all to settle here because everyone will direct
his conduct according to the needs of others. The individual
must have a right to work for his bread as he pleases, but the
public also has a right to insist that essential tasks shall be
properly done. Both points of view must be satisfied, and freedom
of trade should not be such as to jeopardise the general good.

 &sect; 237

Now while the possibility of sharing in the general wealth
is open to individuals and is assured to them by the public authority,
still it is subject to contingencies on the subjective side (quite
apart from the fact that this assurance must remain incomplete),
and the more it presupposes skill, health, capital, and so forth
as its conditions, the more is it so subject.

 &sect; 238

Originally the family is the substantive whole whose function
it is to provide for the individual on his particular side by
giving him either the means and the skill necessary to enable
him to earn his living out of the resources of society, or else
subsistence and maintenance in the event of his suffering a disability.
 But civil society tears the individual from his family ties,
estranges the members of the family from one another, and recognises
them as self-subsistent persons. Further, for the paternal soil
and the external inorganic resources of nature from which the
individual formerly derived his livelihood, it substitutes its
own soil and subjects the permanent existence of even the entire
family to dependence on itself and to contingency. Thus the individual
becomes a son of civil society which has as many claims upon him
as he has rights against it.

 Addition: To be sure, the family has to provide
bread for its members, but in civil society the family' is something
subordinate and only lays the foundations; its effective range
is no longer so comprehensive. Civil society is rather the tremendous
power which draws men into itself and claims from them that they
work for it, owe everything to it, and do everything by its means.
 If man is to be a member of civil society in this sense, he has
rights and claims against it just as he had rights and claims
in the family. Civil society must protect its members and defend
their rights, while its rights impose duties on every one of its
members.

 &sect; 239

In its character as a universal family, civil society has
the right and duty of superintending and influencing education,
inasmuch as education bears upon the child's capacity to become
a member of society. Society's right here is paramount over the
arbitrary and contingent preferences of parents, particularly
in cases where education is to be completed not by the parents
but by others. To the same end, society must provide public educational
facilities so far as is practicable.

 Addition: The line which demarcates the rights
of parents from those of civil society is very hard to draw here.
 Parents usually suppose that in the matter of education they
have complete freedom and may arrange everything as they like.
 The chief opposition to any form of public education usually
comes from parents and it is they who talk and make an outcry
about teachers and schools because they have a faddish dislike
of them. Nonetheless, society has a right to act on principles
tested by its experience and to compel parents to send their children
to school, to have them vaccinated, and so forth. The disputes
that have arisen in France between the advocates of state supervision
and those who demand that education shall be free, i.e. at the
option of the parents, are relevant here.

 &sect; 240

Similarly, society has the right and duty of acting as trustee to those whose extravagance destroys the security of their own
subsistence or their families. It must substitute for extravagance the pursuit of the ends of society and the individuals concerned.

 Addition: There was an Athenian law compelling
every citizen to give an account of his source of livelihoods
Nowadays we take the view that this is nobody's business but his
own. Of course every individual is from one point of view independent,
but he also plays his part in the system of civil society, and
while every man has the right to demand subsistence from it, it
must at the same time protect him from himself. It is not simply
starvation which is at issue; the further end in view is to prevent
the formation of a pauperised rabble. Since civil society is
responsible for feeding its members, it also has the right to
press them to provide for their own livelihood.

 &sect; 241

Not only caprice, however, but also contingencies, physical
conditions, and factors grounded in external circumstances (see
 § 200 ) may reduce men to poverty.
The poor still have the needs common to civil society, and yet since society has withdrawn
from them the natural means of acquisition (see § 217 ) and broken the bond of the family - in the wider sense of the clan (see § 181 ) - their
poverty leaves them more or less deprived of all the advantages of society, of the opportunity of acquiring skill or education of any kind, as well as of the administration of justice, the public health services, and often even of the consolations of religion, and so forth. The public authority takes the place of the family where the poor are concerned in respect not only of their immediate want but also of laziness of disposition, malignity, and the other vices which arise out of their plight and their sense of wrong.

 &sect; 242

Poverty and, in general, the distress of every kind to which
every individual is exposed from the start in the cycle of his
natural life has a subjective side which demands similarly subjective
aid, arising both from the special circumstances of a particular
case and also from love and sympathy. This is the place where
morality finds plenty to do despite all public organisation.
Subjective aid, however, both in itself and in its operation,
is dependent on contingency and consequently society struggles
to make it less necessary, by discovering the general causes of
penury and general means of its relief, and by organising relief
accordingly.

 Remark: Casual almsgiving and casual endowments,
e.g. for the burning of lamps before holy images, &c., are
supplemented by public almshouses, hospitals, street-lighting,
and so forth. There is still quite enough left over and above
these things for charity to do on its own account. A false view
is implied both when charity insists on having this poor-relief
reserved solely to private sympathy and the accidental occurrence
of knowledge and a charitable disposition, and also when it feels
injured or mortified by universal regulations and ordinances which
 are obligatory. Public social conditions are on the contrary
to be regarded as all the more perfect the less (in comparison
with what is arranged publicly) is left for an individual to do
by himself as his private inclination directs.

 &sect; 243

When civil society is in a state of unimpeded activity,
it is engaged in expanding internally in population and industry.
 The amassing of wealth is intensified by generalising (a) the
linkage of men by their needs, and (b) the methods of preparing
and distributing the means to satisfy these needs, because it
is from this double process of generalisation that the largest
profits are derived. That is one side of the picture. The other
side is the subdivision and restriction of particular jobs. This
results in the dependence and distress of the class tied to work
of that sort, and these again entail inability to feel and enjoy
the broader freedoms and especially the intellectual benefits
of civil society.

 &sect; 244

When the standard of living of a large mass of people falls
below a certain subsistence level - a level regulated automatically
as the one necessary for a member of the society - and when there
is a consequent loss of the sense of right and wrong, of honesty
and the self-respect which makes a man insist on maintaining himself
by his own work and effort, the result is the creation of a rabble
of paupers. At the same time this brings with it, at the other
end of the social scale, conditions which greatly facilitate the
concentration of disproportionate wealth in a few hands.

 Addition: The lowest subsistence level, that
of a rabble of paupers, is fixed automatically, but the minimum
varies considerably in different countries. In England, even
the very poorest believe that they have rights; this is different
from what satisfies the poor in other countries. Poverty in itself
does not make men into a rabble; a rabble is created only when
there is joined to poverty a disposition of mind, an inner indignation
against the rich, against society, against the government, &c.
 A further consequence of this attitude is that through their
dependence on chance men become frivolous and idle, like the Neapolitan
lazzaroni for example. In this way there is born in the rabble
the evil of lacking self-respect enough to secure subsistence
by its own labour and yet at the same time of claiming to receive
subsistence as its right. Against nature man can claim no right,
but once society is established, poverty immediately takes the
form of a wrong done to one class by another. The important question
of how poverty is to be abolished is one of the most disturbing
problems which agitate modern society.

 &sect; 245

When the masses begin to decline into poverty, (a) the burden
of maintaining them at their ordinary standard of living might
be directly laid on the wealthier classes, or they might receive
the means of livelihood directly from other public sources of
wealth (e.g. from the endowments of rich hospitals, monasteries,
and other foundations). In either case, however, the needy would
receive subsistence directly, not by means of their work, and
this would violate the principle of civil society and the feeling
of individual independence and self-respect in its individual
members. (b) As an alternative, they might be given subsistence
indirectly through being given work, i.e. the opportunity to work.
 In this event the volume of production would be increased, but
the evil consists precisely in an excess of production and in
the lack of a proportionate number of consumers who are themselves
also producers, and thus it is simply intensified by both of the
methods (a) and (b) by which it is sought to alleviate it. It
hence becomes apparent that despite an excess of wealth civil
society is not rich enough, i.e. its own resources are insufficient
to check excessive poverty and the creation of a penurious rabble.

 Remark: In the example of England we may study
these phenomena on a large scale and also in particular the results
of poor-rates, immense foundations, unlimited private beneficence,
and above all the abolition of the Guild Corporations. In Britain,
particularly in Scotland, the most direct measure against poverty
and especially against the loss of shame and self-respect - the
subjective bases of society - as well as against laziness and extravagance,
&c., the begetters of the rabble, has turned out to be to
leave the poor to their fate and instruct them to beg in the streets.
 &sect; 246

This inner dialectic of civil society thus drives it - or
at any rate drives a specific civil society - to push beyond its
own limits and seek markets, and so its necessary means of subsistence,
in other lands which are either deficient in the goods it has
over-produced, or else generally backward in industry, &c.

 &sect; 247

The principle of family life is dependence on the soil,
on land, terra firma . Similarly, the natural element for industry,
animating its outward movement, is the sea. Since the passion
for gain involves risk, industry though bent on gain yet lifts
itself above it; instead of remaining rooted to the soil and the
limited circle of civil life with its pleasures and desires, it
embraces the element of flux, danger, and destruction. Further,
the sea is the greatest means of communication, and trade by sea
creates commercial connections between distant countries and so
relations involving contractual rights. At the same time, commerce
of this kind is the most potent instrument of culture, and through
it trade acquires its significance in the history of the world.

Rivers are not natural boundaries of separation, which is what they have been accounted to be in modern times. On the contrary, it is truer to say that they, and the sea likewise, link men together. Horace is wrong when he says:

 deus abscidit
prudens Oceano dissociabili
terras.

[vain was the purpose of the god in severing the lands by the estranging ocean.]

 Remark: The proof of this lies not merely in
the fact that the basins of rivers are inhabited by a single clan
or tribe, but also, for example, in the ancient bonds between
Greece, Ionia, and Magna Graecia, between Brittany and Britain,
between Denmark and Norway, Sweden, Finland, Livonia, &c.,
bonds, further, which are especially striking in contrast with
the comparatively slight intercourse between the inhabitants of
the littoral and those of the hinterland. To realise what an
instrument of culture lies in the link with the sea, consider
countries where industry flourishes and contrast their relation
to the sea with that of countries which have eschewed sea-faring
and which, like Egypt and India, have become stagnant and in the
most frightful and scandalous superstition. Notice also how all
great progressive peoples press onward to the sea.

 &sect; 248

This far-flung connecting link affords the means for the
colonising activity - sporadic or systematic - to which mature
civil society is driven and by which it supplies to a part of
its population a return to life on the family basis in a new land
and so also supplies itself with a new demand and field for its
industry.

 Addition: Civil society is thus driven to found
colonies. Increase of population alone has this effect, but it
is due in particular to the appearance of a number of people who
cannot secure the satisfaction of their needs by their own labour
once production rises above the requirements of consumers. Sporadic
colonisation is particularly characteristic of Germany. The emigrants
withdraw to America or Russia and remain there with no home ties,
and so prove useless to their native land. The second and entirely
different type of colonisation is the systematic; the state undertakes
it, is aware of the proper method of carrying it out and regulates
it accordingly. This type was common amongst the ancients, particularly
the Greeks. Hard work was not the business of the citizens in
Greece, since their energy was directed rather to public affairs.
 So if the population increased to such an extent that there might
be difficulty in feeding it, the young people would be sent away
to a new district, sometimes specifically chosen, sometimes left
to chance discovery. In modern times, colonists have not been
allowed the same rights as those left at home, and the result
of this situation has been wars and finally independence, as may
be seen in the history of the English and Spanish colonies. Colonial
independence proves to be of the greatest advantage to the mother
country, just as the emancipation of slaves turns out to the greatest
advantage of the owners.

 &sect; 249

While the public authority must also undertake the higher
directive function of providing for the interests which lead beyond
the borders of its society (see § 246 ), its primary purpose
is to actualise and maintain the universal contained within the
particularity of civil society, and its control takes the form
of an external system and organisation for the protection and
security of particular ends and interests en masse , inasmuch as
these interests subsist only in this universal. This universal
is immanent in the interests of particularity itself and, in accordance
with the Idea, particularity makes it the end and object of its
own willing and activity. In this way ethical principles circle
back and appear in civil society as a factor immanent in it;
this constitutes the specific character of the Corporation.

 (b) The Corporation

 &sect; 250

In virtue of the substantiality of its natural and family
life, the agricultural class has directly within itself the concrete
universal in which it lives. The class of civil servants is universal
in character and so has the universal explicitly as its ground
and as the aim of its activity. The class between them, the business
class, is essentially concentrated on the particular, and hence
it is to it that Corporations are specially appropriate.

 &sect; 251

The labour organisation of civil society is split, in accordance
with the nature of its particulars, into different branches.
The implicit likeness of such particulars to one another becomes
really existent in an association, as something common to its
members. Hence a selfish purpose, directed towards its particular
self-interest, apprehends and evinces itself at the same time
as universal; and a member of civil society is in virtue of his
own particular skill a member of a Corporation, whose universal
purpose is thus wholly concrete and no wider in scope than the
purpose involved in business, its proper task and interest.

 &sect; 252

In accordance with this definition of its functions, a Corporation
has the right, under the surveillance of the public authority,
(a) to look after its own interests within its own sphere, (b)
to co-opt members, qualified objectively by the requisite skill
and rectitude, to a number fixed by the general structure of society,
(c) to protect its members against particular contingencies, (d)
to provide the education requisite to fit others to become members.
 In short, its right is to come on the scene like a second family
for its members, while civil society can only be an indeterminate
sort of family because it comprises everyone and so is farther
removed from individuals and their special exigencies.

 Remark: The Corporation member is to be distinguished
from a day labourer or from a man who is prepared to undertake
casual employment on a single occasion. The former who is, or
will become, master of his craft, is a member of the association
not for casual gain on single occasions but for the whole range,
the universality, of his personal livelihood.

Privileges, in the sense of the rights of a branch of civil society
organised into a Corporation, are distinct in meaning from privileges-proper,
in the etymological sense. The latter are casual exceptions
to universal rules; the former, however, are only the crystallisation,
as regulations, of characteristics inherent in an essential branch
of society itself owing to its nature as particular.

 &sect; 253

In the Corporation, the family has its stable basis in the
sense that its livelihood is assured there, conditionally upon
capability, i.e. it has a stable capital (see § 170 ) - In addition, his nexus of capability and livelihood is a recognised
fact, with he result that the Corporation member needs no external
marks beyond his own membership as evidence of his skill and his
regular income and subsistence, i.e. as evidence that he is a
somebody. It is also recognised that he belongs to a whole which
is itself an organ of the entire society, and that he is actively
concerned in promoting the comparatively disinterested end of
this whole. Thus he commands the respect due to one in his social
position.

 Remark: The institution of Corporations corresponds,
on account of its assurance of capital, to the introduction of
agriculture and private property in another sphere (see Remark to § 203 ).

When complaints are made about the luxury of the business classes
their passion for extravagance - which have as their concomitant
creation of a rabble of paupers (see § 244 ) - we must not
forget that besides its other causes (e.g. increasing mechanisation
of labour) this phenomenon has an ethical ground, as was indicated
above. Unless he is a member of an authorised Corporation (and
it is only by being authorised that an association becomes a Corporation),
an individual is without rank or dignity, his isolation reduces
his business to mere self-seeking, and his livelihood and satisfaction
become insecure. Consequently, he has to try to gain recognition
for himself by giving external proofs of success in his business,
and to these proofs no limits can be set. He cannot live in the
manner of his class, for no class really exists for him, since
in civil society it is only something common to particular persons
which really exists, i.e. something legally constituted and recognised.
 Hence he cannot achieve for himself a way of life proper to his
class and less idiosyncratic.

Within the Corporation the help which poverty receives loses its
accidental character and the humiliation wrongfully associated
with it. The wealthy perform their duties to their fellow associates
and thus riches cease to inspire either pride or envy, pride in
their owners, envy in others. In these conditions rectitude obtains
its proper recognition and respect.

 &sect; 254

The so-called ‘natural' right of exercising one's skill
and thereby earning what there is to be earned is restricted within
the Corporation only in so far as it is therein made rational
instead of natural. That is to say, it becomes freed from personal
opinion and contingency, saved from endangering either the individual
workman or others, recognised, guaranteed, and at the same time
elevated to conscious effort for a common end.

 &sect; 255

As the family was the first, so the Corporation is the second
ethical root of the state, the one planted in civil society.
The former contains the moments of subjective particularity and
objective universality in a substantial unity. But these moments
are sundered in civil society to begin with; on the one side there
is the particularity of need and satisfaction, reflected into
itself, and on the other side the universality of abstract rights.
 In the Corporation these moments are united in an inward fashion,
so that in this union particular welfare is present as a right
and is actualised.

 Remark: The sanctity of marriage and the dignity
of Corporation membership are the two fixed points round which
the unorganised atoms of civil society revolve.

 Addition: The consideration behind the abolition
of Corporations in recent times is that the individual should
fend for himself. But we may grant this and still hold that corporation
membership does not alter a man's obligation to earn his living.
 Under modern political conditions, the citizens have only a restricted
share in the public business of the state, yet it is essential
to provide men - ethical entities - with work of a public character
over and above their private business. This work of a public
character, which the modern state does not always provide, is
found in the Corporation. We saw earlier [ Addition to §
184 ] that in fending for himself a member of civil society is
also working for others. But this unconscious compulsion is not
enough; it is in the Corporation that it first changes into a
known and thoughtful ethical mode of life. Of course Corporations
must fall under the higher surveillance of the state, because
otherwise they would ossify, build themselves in, and decline
into a miserable system of castes. In and by itself, however,
a Corporation is not a closed caste; its purpose is rather to
bring an isolated trade into the social order and elevate it to
a sphere in which it gains strength and respect.

 &sect; 256

The end of the Corporation is restricted and finite, while
the public authority was an external organisation involving a
separation and a merely relative identity of controller and controlled
The end of the former and the externality and relative identity
of the latter find their truth in the absolutely universal end
and its absolute actuality. Hence the sphere of civil society
passes over into the state.

 Remark: The town is the seat of the civil life
of business. There reflection arises, turns in upon itself, and
pursues its atomising task; each man maintains himself in and
through his relation to others who, like himself, are persons
possessed of rights. The country, on the other hand, is the seat
of an ethical life resting on nature and the family. Town and
country thus constitute the two moments, still ideal moments,
whose true ground is the state, although it is from them that
the state springs.

The philosophic proof of the concept of the state is this development
of ethical life from its immediate phase through civil society,
the phase of division, to the state, which then reveals itself
as the true ground of these phases. A proof in philosophic science
can only be a development of this kind.

Since the state appears as a result in the advance of the philosophic concept through displaying itself as the true ground [of the earlier phases], that show of mediation is now cancelled and the state has become directly present before us. Actually, therefore, the state as such is not so much the result as the beginning. It is within the state that the family is first developed into civil
society, and it is the Idea of the state itself which disrupts itself into these two moments. Through the development of civil society, the substance of ethical life acquires its infinite form, which contains in itself these two moments: (1) infinite differentiation down to the inward experience of independent self-consciousness, and (2) the form of universality involved in education, the form of thought whereby mind is objective and actual to itself as an organic totality in laws and institutions which are its will in terms of thought.

 Criticism by Marx - The State (next section)

 Hegel-by-HyperText Home Page @ marxists.org