Hegel's Philosophy of Right: Introduction

 Hegel's Philosophy of Right

 Introduction

 &sect; 1

THE philosophic science of right has as its object the idea of
right, i.e., the conception of right and the realisation of the
conception.

 Remark: Philosophy has to do with ideas or realised
thoughts, and hence not with what we have been accustomed to call
mere conceptions. It has indeed to exhibit the one-sidedness
and untruth of these mere conceptions, and to show that, while
that which commonly bears the name "conception," is
only an abstract product of the understanding, the true conception
alone has reality and gives this reality to itself. Everything,
other than the reality which is established by the conception,
is transient surface existence, external attribute, opinion, appearance
void of essence, untruth, delusion, and so forth. Through the
actual shape [ Gestaltung ], which it takes upon itself in actuality, is the
conception itself understood. This shape is the other essential
element of the idea, and is to be distinguished from the form [ Form ],
which exists only as conception [ Begriff ].

 Addition: The conception and its existence are
two sides, distinct yet united, like soul and body. The body
is the same life as the soul, and yet the two can be named independently.
 A soul without a body would not be a living thing, and vice
versa. Thus the visible existence of the conception is its
body, just as the body obeys the soul which produced it. Seeds
contain the tree and its whole power, though they are not the
tree itself ; the tree corresponds accurately to the simple structure
of the seed. If the body does not correspond to the soul, it
is defective. The unity of visible existence and conception,
of body and soul, is the idea. It is not a mere harmony of the
two, but their complete interpenetration. There lives nothing,
which is not in some way idea. The idea of right is freedom,
which, if it is to be apprehended truly, must be known both in
its conception and in the embodiment of the conception.
 &sect; 2.

The science of right is a part of philosophy . Hence it must develop
the idea, which is the reason of an object, out of the conception.
 It is the same thing to say that it must regard the peculiar
internal development of the thing itself. Since it is a part,
it has a definite beginning, which is the result and truth of
what goes before, and this, that goes before, constitutes its
so-called proof. Hence the origin of the conception of right
falls outside of the science of right. The deduction of the conception
is presupposed in this treatise, and is to be considered as already
given.

 Addition: Philosophy forms a circle. It has,
since it must somehow make a beginning, a primary, directly given
matter, which is not proved and is not a result. But this starting-point
is simply relative, since, from another point of view it appears
as a result. Philosophy is a consequence, which does not hang
in the air or form a directly new beginning, but is self-enclosed.

According to the formal unphilosophic method of the sciences,
definition is the first desideratum, as regards, at least, the
external scientific form. The positive science of right, however,
is little concerned with definition, since its special aim is
to give what it is that is right, and also the particular phases
of the laws. For this reason it has been said as a warning, Omnis
definitio in jure civili periculosa [Any definition in civil law is dangerous]; and in fact the more
disconnected and contradictory the phases of a right are, the
less possible is a definition of it.

A definition should contain only universal features; but these
forthwith bring to light contradictions, which in the case of
law are injustice, in all their nakedness. Thus in Roman law,
for instance, no definition of man was possible, because it excluded
the slave. The conception of man was destroyed by the fact of
slavery. In the same way to have defined property and owner would
have appeared to be perilous to many relations. But definitions
may perhaps be derived from etymology, for the reason, principally,
that in this way special cases are avoided, and a basis is found
in the feeling and imaginative thought of men.

The correctness of a definition would thus consist in its agreement
with existing ideas. By such a method everything essentially
scientific is cast aside. As regards the content there is cast
aside the necessity of the self-contained and self-developed object,
and as regards the form there is discarded the nature of the conception.
 In philosophic knowledge the necessity of a conception is the
main thing, and the process, by which it, as a result, has come
into being is the proof and deduction. After the content is seen
to be necessary independently, the second point is to look about
for that which corresponds to it in existing ideas and modes of
speech. But the way in which a conception exists in its truth,
and the way it presents itself in random ideas not only are but
must be different both in form and structure. If a notion is
not in its content false, the conception can be shown to be contained
in it and to be already there in its essential traits.

A notion [ Vorstellung ] may thus be raised to the form of a conception [ Begriff ]. But
so little is any notion the measure and criterion of an independently
necessary and true conception, that it must accept truth from
the conception, be justified by it, and know itself through it.
 If the method of knowing, which proceeds by formal definition,
inference and proof, has more or less disappeared, a worse one
has come to take its place. This new method maintains that ideas,
as, e.g., the idea of right in all its aspects, are to be directly
apprehended as mere facts of consciousness, and that natural feeling
or that heightened form of it which is known as the inspiration
of one's own breast, is the source of right. This method may
be the most convenient of all, but it is also the most unphilosophic.
 Other features of this view, referring not merely to knowledge
but directly to action, need not detain us here. While the first
or formal method went so far as to require in definition the form
of the conception, and in proof the form of a necessity of knowledge,
the method of the intuitive consciousness and feeling takes
for its principle the arbitrary contingent consciousness of the
subject. In this treatise we take for granted the scientific
procedure of philosophy, which has been set forth in the philosophic
logic.

 &sect; 3

Right is positive in general (a) in its form, since it has validity in a state; and this established authority is the principle for the knowledge of right. Hence we have the positive science of right. (b) On the side of content this right receives a positive element [a] through the particular character
of a nation, the stage of its historical development, and the
interconnection of all the relations which are necessitated by
nature: [b] through the necessity that a system of legalised
right must contain the application of the universal conception
to objects and cases whose qualities are given externally. Such
an application is not the speculative thought or the development
of the conception, but a subsumption made by the understanding:
 [c] through the ultimate nature of a decision which has become
a reality.

 Remark: Philosophy at least cannot recognise the authority of feeling, inclination and caprice, when they are set in opposition to positive right and the laws. It is an accident, external to the nature of positive right, when force or tyranny becomes an element of it. It will be shown later ( §§ 211 - 214 ), at what point right must become positive. The general phases which are there deduced, are here only mentioned, in order to indicate the limit of philosophic right, and also to forestall the idea or indeed the demand that by a systematic development of right should be produced a law-book, such as would be needed by in actual state. To convert the differences between right of nature and positive right, or those between philosophic right and positive right, into open antagonism would be a complete misunderstanding.

Natural right or philosophic right stands to positive right as
institutions to pandects. With regard to the historical element
in positive right, referred to in the paragraph, it may be said
that the true historical view and genuine philosophic standpoint
have been presented by Montesquieu. He regards legislation and
its specific traits not in an isolated and abstract way, but rather
as a dependent element of one totality, connecting it with all
the other elements which form the character of a nation and an
epoch. In this interrelation the various elements receive their
meaning and justification. The purely historical treatment of
the phases of right, as they develop in time, and a comparison
of their results with existing relations of right have their own
value; but they are out of place in a philosophic treatise, except
in so far as the development out of historic grounds coincides
with the development out of the conception, and the historical
exposition and justification can be made to cover a justification
which is valid in itself and independently.

This distinction is as manifest as it is weighty. A phase of
right may be shown to rest upon and follow from the circumstances
and existing institutions of right, and yet may be absolutely
unreasonable and void of right. This is the case in Roman law
with many aspects of private right, which were the logical results
of its interpretation of paternal power and of marriage. Further,
if the aspects of right are really right and reasonable, it is
one thing to point out what with regard to them can truly take
place through the conception, and quite another thing to portray
the manner of their appearance in history, along with the circumstances,
cases, wants and events, which they have called forth. Such a
demonstration and deduction from nearer or more remote historic
causes, which is the occupation of pragmatic history, is frequently
called exposition, or preferably conception, under the opinion
that in such an indication of the historic elements is found all
that is essential to a conception of law and institutions of right.
 In point of fact that which is truly essential, the conception
of the matter, has not been so much as mentioned. So also we
are accustomed to hear of Roman or German conceptions of right,
and of conceptions of right as they are laid down in this or that
statute-book, when indeed nothing about conceptions can be found
in them, but only general phases of right, propositions derived
from the understanding, general maxims, and laws.

By neglect of the distinction, just alluded to, the true standpoint
is obscured and the question of a valid justification is shifted
into a justification based upon circumstances; results are founded
on presuppositions, which in themselves are of little value; and
in general the relative is put in place of the absolute, and external
appearance in place of the nature of the thing. When the historical
vindication substitutes the external origin for the origin from
the conception, it unconsciously does the opposite of what it
intends. Suppose that an institution, originating under definite
circumstances, is shown to be necessary and to answer its purpose,
and that it accomplishes all that is required of it by the historical
standpoint. When such a proof is made to stand for a justification
of the thing itself, it follows that, when the circumstances are
removed, the institution has lost its meaning and its right.
When, e.g., it is sought to support and defend cloisters on the
grounds that they have served to clear and people the wilderness
and by teaching and transcribing to preserve scholarship, it follows
that just in so far as the circumstances are changed, cloisters
have become aimless and superfluous.

In so far as the historic significance, or the historical exposition
and interpretation of the origin of anything is in different spheres
at home with the philosophic view of the origin and conception
of the thing one might tolerate the other. But, in illustration
of the fact that they neither here nor in science, preserve this
peaceful attitude, I quote from Mr. Hugo's Textbook of the
History of Roman Law . In this work Mr. Hugo says (5th edition
§ 53) that "Cicero praises the twelve tables with a
side glance at philosophy, ... but the philosopher Phavorinus
treats them exactly as many a great philosopher since has treated
positive right." Mr. Hugo makes the ultimate reply to such
a method as that of Phavorinus, when he says of him that he "understood
the twelve tables just as little as the philosophers understood
positive right." The correction of the philosopher Phavorinus
by the jurist Sextus Caecilius (Gellius. "Noct. Attic."
xx. 1) expresses the lasting and true principle of the justification
of that which is in its content merely positive. " Non
ignoras ," as Caecilius felicitously remarks to Phavorinus,
" legum opportunitates et medelas pro temporum moribus,
et pro rerum publicarum generibus, ac pro utilitatum praesentium
rationibus, proque vitiorum, quibus medendum est, fervoribus mutari
ae flecti, neque uno statu consistere, quin, ut facies coeli et
maris, ita rerum atque fortunae tempestatibus varientur. Quid
salubrius visuin est rogatione illa Stolonis, etc., quid utilius
plebiscite Voconio, etc., quid tam necessarium existimatum est,
quam lex Licinia, etc.? Omnia tamen haec obliterate et operta
sunt civitatis opulentia ," etc. These laws are Positive
so far as they have meaning and appropriateness under the circumstances,
and thus have only an historic value. For this reason they are
in their nature transient. Whether the legislator or government
was wise or not in what it did for its own immediate time and
circumstances is a matter quite by itself and is for history to
say.

History will the more profoundly recognise the action of the legislator
in proportion as its estimate receives support from the philosophic
standpoint. From the vindications of the twelve tables against
the judgment of Phavorinus I shall give further examples, because
in them Caecilius furnishes an illustration of the fraud which
is indissolubly bound up with the methods of the understanding
and its reasoning. He adduces a good reason for a bad thing,
and supposes that lie has in that way justified the thing. Take
the horrible law which permitted a creditor, after the lapse of
a fixed term of respite, to kill a debtor or sell him into slavery.
 Nay, further, if there were several creditors, they were permitted
to cut pieces off the debtor, and thus divide him amongst them,
with the proviso that if any one of them should cut off too much or
too little, no action should be taken against him.

It was this malaise, it may be noticed, which stood Shakespeare's
Shylock in The Merchant of Venice in such good stead, and
was by him most thankfully accepted. Well, for this law Caecilius
adduces the good argument that by it trust and credit were more
firmly secured, and also that, by reason of the very horror of
the law, it never had to be enforced. Not only does he in his
want of thought fail to observe that by the severity of the law
that very intention of securing trust and credit was defeated,
but lie forthwith himself gives an illustration of the way in
which the disproportionate punishment caused the law to be inoperative,
namely through the habit of giving false witness. But the remark
of Mr. Hugo that, Phavorinus bad not understood the law is not
to be passed over. Now any schoolboy can understand the law just
quoted, and better than anyone else would Shylock have understood
what was to him of such advantage. Hence, by "understand"
Mr. Hugo must mean that form of understanding which consists in
brining to the support of a law a good reason. Another failure
to understand, asserted by Caecilius of Phavorinus, a philosopher
at any rate may without blushing acknowledge: jumentum ,
which without any arcera was the only legal way to bring
a sick man into court as a witness, was held to mean not only
t horse but also a carriage or wagon. Further on in this raw
Caecilius found more evidence of the excellence and accuracy of
the old statutes, which for the purpose of non-suiting a sick
man at court distinguished not only between a horse and a wagon,
but also, as Caecilius explains, between a wagon covered and cushioned
and one not so comfortably equipped. Thus one would have the
choice between utter severity on one side, and on the other senseless
details. But to exhibit fully the absurdity of these laws and
the pedantic defence offered in their behalf would give rise to
an invincible repugnance to all scholarship of that kind.

But in his manual Mr. Hugo speaks also of rationality in (connection
with Roman law, and I have been struck with the following remarks.
 He first of all treats of the epoch extending from the origin
of the Republic to the twelve tables (§§ 38, 39), noticing
that in Rome people had many wants, and were compelled in their
labour to use draught animals and beasts of burden, as we ourselves
do, and that the ground was an alternation of hill and valley
that the city was set upon a hill, etc. These statements might,
perhaps, have answered to the sense of Montesquieu's thought,
though in them it would be well-nigh impossible to find his genius.
 But after these preliminary paragraphs, he goes on to say in
§ 40, that the condition of the law was still very far from
satisfying the highest demands of reason. This remark is wholly
in place, as the Roman family-right, slavery, etc., give no satisfaction
to the smallest demands of reason. Yet when discussing the succeeding
epochs, Mr. Hugo forgets to tell us in what particulars, if any,
the Roman law has satisfactorily met the highest demands of reason.
 Still of the classic jurists. who flourished in the era of the
greatest expansion of Roman law as a science, it is said (§
289) that "it has been long since been observed that the
Roman jurists were educated in philosophy," but "few
know" (more will know now through the numerous editions of
Mr. Hugo's manual) "that there is no class of writers, who,
as regards deduction from principles, deserved to be placed beside
the mathematicians, and also, as regards the quite remarkable
way in which they develop their conceptions, beside the modern
founder of metaphysic ; as voucher for this assertion is the notable
fact that nowhere do so many trichotomies occur as in the classic
jurists and in Kant."

This form of logical reasoning, extolled by Leibnitz, is certainly
an essential feature of the science of right, as it is of mathematics
and every other intelligible science; but the logical procedure
of the mere understanding, spoken of by Mr. Hugo, has nothing
to do with the satisfaction of the claims of reason and with philosophic
science. Moreover, the very lack of logical procedure, which
is characteristic of the Roman jurists and proctors, is to be
esteemed as one of their chief virtues, since by means of it they
obviated the consequences of unrighteous and horrible institutions.
 Through their want of logic they were compelled callide
to put sense into mere verbal distinctions, as they did when they
identified Bonorum possessio with inheritance, and also
into silly evasions, for silliness is a defect of logic, in order
to save the letter of the tables, as was done in the fictio
or hypokrisis that a filia patroni was a filius
 (Heineec. Antiq. Rom ., lib. i. tit. ii. § 24).
 But it is absurd to place the classic jurists, with their use
of trichotomy, along with Kant, and in that way to discern in
them the promise of the development of conceptions.

 &sect; 4

The territory of right is in general the spiritual, and its more
definite place and origin is the will, which is free. Thus freedom
constitutes the substance and essential character of the will,
and the system of right is the kingdom of actualised freedom.
 It is the world of spirit, which is produced out of itself, and
is a second nature.

 Addition: Freedom of will is best explained
by reference to physical nature. Freedom is a fundamental phase
of will, as weight is of bodies. When it is said that matter
is heavy, it might be meant that the predicate is an attribute;
but such is not the case, for in matter there is nothing which
has not weight; in fact, matter is weight. That which is heavy
constitutes the body, and is the body. Just so is it with freedom
and the will; that which is free is the will. Will without freedom
is an empty word, and freedom becomes actual only as will, as
subject. A remark may also be made as to the connection of willing
and thinking. Spirit, in general, is thought, and by thought
man is distinguished from the animal. But we must not imagine
that man is on one side thinking and on another side willing,
as though he had will in one pocket and thought in another. Such
an idea is vain. The distinction between thought and will is
only that between a theoretical and a practical relation. They
are not two separate faculties. The will is a special way of
thinking; it is thought translating itself into reality; it is
the impulse of thought to give itself reality. The distinction
between thought and will may be expressed in this way. When I
think an object, I make of it a thought, and take from it the
sensible. Thus I make of it something which is essentially and
directly mine. Only in thought am I self-contained. Conception
is the penetration of the object, which is then no longer opposed
to me. From it I have taken its own peculiar nature, which it
had as an independent object in opposition to me. As Adam said
to Eve, "thou art flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone,"
so says the spirit, "This object is spirit of my spirit,
and all alienation has disappeared." Any idea is a universalising,
and this process belongs to thinking. To make something universal
is to think. The "I" is thought and the universal.
 When I say "I," I let fall all particularity of character,
natural endowment, knowledge, age. The I is empty, a point and
simple, but in its simplicity active. The gaily coloured world
is before me ; I stand opposed to it, and in this relation I cancel
and transcend the opposition, and make the content my own. The
I is at home in the world, when it knows it, and still more when
it has conceived it.

So much for the theoretical relation. The practical, on the other
hand, begins with thinking, with the I itself. It thus appears
first of all as placed in opposition, because it exhibits, as
it were, a separation. As I am practical, I am active; I act
and determine myself; and to determine myself means to set up
a distinction. But these distinctions are again mine, my own
determinations come to me; and the ends are mine, to which I am
impelled. Even when I let these distinctions and determinations
go, setting them in the so-called external world, they remain
mine. They are that which I have done and made, and bear the
trace of my spirit. That is the distinction to be drawn between
the theoretical and the practical relations.

And now the connection of the two must be also stated. The theoretical
is essentially contained in the practical. Against the idea that
the two are separate runs the fact that man has no will without
intelligence. The will holds within itself the theoretical, the
will determines itself, and this determination is in the first
instance internal. That which I will I place before my mind,
and it is an object for me. The animal acts according to instinct,
is impelled by something internal, and so is also practical.
But it has no will, because it cannot place before its mind what
it desires. Similarly man cannot use his theoretic faculty or
think without will, for in thinking we are active. The content
of what is thought receives, indeed, the form of something existing,
but this existence is occasioned by our activity and by it, established.
These distinctions of theoretical and practical are inseparable; they are one and the same; and in every activity, whether of thought or will, both these elements are found.

It is worth while to recall the older way of proceeding with regard
to the freedom of the will. First of all, the idea of the will
was assumed, and then an effort was made to deduce from it and
establish a definition of the will. Next, the method of the older
empirical psychology was adopted, and different perceptions and
general phenomena of the ordinary consciousness were collected,
such as remorse, guilt, and the like, on the ground that these
could be explained only as proceeding out of a will that is free.
 Then from these phenomena was deduced the so-called proof that
the will is free. But it is more convenient to take a short cut
and hold that freedom is given as a fact of consciousness, and
must be believed in.

The nature of the will and of freedom, and the proof that the
will is free, can be shown, as has already been observed ( § 2 ), only in connection with the whole. The ground principles of
the premises that spirit is in the first instance intelligence,
and that the phases, through which it passes in its development,
namely from feeling, through imaginative thinking to thought,
are the way by which it produces itself as will, which, in turn,
as the practical spirit in general, is the most direct truth of
intelligence - I have presented in my Encyclopaedia of the
Philosophical Sciences (1817), and hope some day to be able
to give of them a more complete exposition. There is, to my mind,
so much the more need for me to give my contribution to, as I
hope, the more thorough knowledge of the nature of spirit, since,
as I have there said, it would be difficult to find a philosophic
science in a more neglected and evil plight than is that theory
of spirit, which is commonly called psychology. Some elements
of the conception of will, resulting from the premises enumerated
above are mentioned in this and the following paragraphs. As
to these, appeal may moreover be made to every individual to see
them in his own self-consciousness. Everyone will, in the first
place, find in himself the ability to abstract himself from all
that he is, and in this way prove himself able of himself to set
every content within himself, and thus have in his own consciousness
an illustration of all the subsequent phases.

 &sect; 5

The will contains [a] the element of pure indeterminateness,
i.e., the pure doubling of the I back in thought upon itself.
 In this process every limit or content, present though it be
directly by way of nature, as in want, appetite or impulse, or
given in any specific way, is dissolved. Thus we have the limitless
infinitude of absolute abstraction, or universality, the pure
thought of itself.

 Remark: Those who treat thinking and willing as
two special peculiar and separate faculties, and, further, look
upon thought as detrimental to the will, especially the good will,
show from the very start that they know nothing of the nature
of willing, a remark which we shall be called upon to a number
of times upon the same attitude of mind. The will on one side
is the possibility of abstraction from every aspect in which the
I finds itself or has set itself up. It reckons any content as
a limit, and flees from it. This is one of the forms of the self-direction
of the will, and is by imaginative thinking insisted upon as of
itself freedom. It is the negative side of the will, or freedom
as apprehended by the understanding. This freedom is that of
the void, which his taken actual shape, and is stirred to passion.
 It, while remaining purely theoretical, appears in Hindu religion
as the fanaticism of pure contemplation; but becoming actual it
assumes both in politics and religion the form of a fanaticism,
which would destroy the established social order, remove all individuals
suspected of desiring any kind of order, and demolish any organisation
which then sought to rise out of the ruins only in devastation
does the negative will feel that it has reality. It intends,
indeed, to bring to pass some positive social condition, such
as universal equality or universal religious life. But in fact
it does not will the positive reality of any such condition, since
that would carry in its train a system, and introduce a separation
by way of institutions and between individuals. But classification
and objective system attain self consciousness only by destroying
negative freedom. Negative freedom is actuated by a mere solitary
idea, whose realisation is nothing but the fury of desolation.

 Addition: This phase of will implies that I
break loose from everything, give up all ends, and bury myself
in abstraction. It is man alone who can let go everything, even
life. He can commit suicide, an act impossible for the animal,
which always remains only negative, abiding in a state foreign
to itself, to which it must merely get accustomed. Man is pure thought
of himself, and only in thinking has he the power to give himself
universality and distinguish in himself all that is particular
and definite.

Negative freedom, or freedom of the understanding, is one-sided,
yet as this one-sidedness contains an essential feature, it is
not to be discarded. But the defect of the understanding is that
it exalts its one-sidedness to the sole highest place. This form
of freedom frequently occurs in history. By the Hindus, e.g.,
the highest freedom is declared to be persistence in the consciousness
of one's simple identity with himself, to abide in the empty space
of one's own inner being, like the colourless light of pure intuition,
and to renounce every activity of life, every purpose and every
idea. In this way man becomes Brahma; there is no longer any
distinction between finite man and Brahma, every difference having
been swallowed up in this universality. A more concrete manifestation
of this freedom is fanaticism of political and religious life.
 Of this nature was the terrible epoch of the French Revolution,
by which all distinctions in talent and authority were to have
 been superseded. In this time of upheaval and commotion any
specific thing was intolerable. Fanaticism wills an abstraction
and not an articulate association. It finds all distinctions
antagonistic to its indefiniteness, and supersedes them. Hence
in the French Revolution the people abolished the institutions
which they themselves had set up, since every institution is inimical
to the abstract self-consciousness of equality.

 &sect; 6

 [b] The I is also the transition from blank
indefiniteness to the distinct and definite establishment of a
definite content and object, whether this content be given by
nature or produced out of the conception of spirit. Through this
establishment of itself as a definite thing the I becomes a reality.
 This is the absolute element of the finitude or specialisation
of the I.

 Remark: This second element in the characterisation
of the I is just as negative as the first, since it annuls and
replaces the first abstract negativity. As the particular is
contained in the universal, so this second phase is contained
already in the first, and is only an establishing of what the
first is implicitly. The first phase, if taken independently,
is not the true infinitude, i.e., the concrete universal, or the
conception, but limited and one-sided. In that it is the abstraction
from all definite character, it has a definite character. Its
abstract and one-sided nature constitutes its definite character,
its defect and finitude.

The distinct characterisation of these two phases of the I is
found in the philosophy of Fichte as also in that of Kant. Only,
in the exposition of Fichte the I, when taken as unlimited, as
it is in the first proposition of his Wissenschaftslehre ,
is merely positive. It is the universality and identity made
by the understanding. Hence this abstract I is in its independence
to be taken as the truth, to which by way of mere addition comes
in the second proposition, the limitation, or the negative in
general, whether it be in the form of a given external limit or
of an activity of the I. To apprehend the negative as immanent
in the universal or self-identical, and also as in the I, was
the next step, which speculative philosophy had to make. Of this
want they have no presentiment, who like Fichte never apprehend
that the infinite and finite are, if separated, abstract, and
must be seen as immanent one in the other.

 Addition: This second element makes its appearance
as the opposite of the first ; it is to be understood in its general
form: it belongs to freedom but does not constitute the whole
of it. Here the I passes over from blank indeterminateness to
the distinct establishment of a specific character as a content
or object. I do not will merely, but I will something. Such
a will, as is analysed in the preceding paragraph, wills only
the abstract universal, and therefore wills nothing. Hence it
is not a will. The particular thing, which the will wills is
a limitation, since the will, in order to be a will, must in general
limit itself. Limit or negation consists in the will willing
something Particularising is thus as a rule named finitude. Ordinary
reflection holds the first element, that of the indefinite, for
the absolute and higher. and the limited for a mere negation of
this indefiniteness. But this indefiniteness is itself only a
negation, in contrast with the definite and finite. The I is
solitude and absolute negation. The indefinite will is thus quite
as much one-sided as the will, which continues merely in the definite.
 &sect; 7

 [c] The will is the unity of these two elements.
 It is particularity turned back within itself and thus led back
to universality; it is individuality; it is the self-direction
of the I. Thus at one and the same time it establishes itself
as its own negation, that is to say, as definite and limited,
and it also abides by itself, in its self-identity and universality,
and in this position remains purely self-enclosed. The I determines
itself in so far as it is the reference of negativity to itself
; and yet in this self-reference it is indifferent to its own
definite character. This it knows as its own, that is, as an
ideal or a mere possibility, by which it is not bound, but rather
exists in it merely because it establishes itself there. This
is the freedom of the will, constituting its conception or substantive
reality. It is its gravity, as it were, just as gravity is the
substantive reality of a body.

 Remark: Every self-consciousness knows itself
as at once universal, or the possibility of abstracting itself
from everything definite, and as particular, with a fixed object,
content or aim. These two elements, however, are only abstractions.
 The concrete and true, and all that is true is concrete, is the
universality, to which the particular is at first opposed, but,
when it has been turned back into itself, is in the end made equal.
 This unity is individuality, but it is not a simple unit as is
the individuality of imaginative thought, but a unit in terms
of the conception ( Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences ,
§§ 112-114). In other words, this individuality is
properly nothing else than the conception. The first two elements
of the will, that it can abstract itself from everything, and
that it is definite through either its own activity or something
else, are easily admitted and comprehended, because in their separation
they are untrue, and characteristic of the mere understanding.
 But into the third, the true and speculative - and all truth,
as far as it is conceived, must be thought speculatively - the
understanding declines to venture, always calling the conception
the inconceivable. The proof and more detailed explanation of
this inmost reserve of speculation, of infinitude as the negativity
which refers itself to itself, and of this ultimate source of
all activity, life and consciousness, belong to logic, as the
purely speculative philosophy. Here it can be noticed only in
passing that, in the sentences, "The will is universal. ...
The will directs itself," the will is already regarded as
presupposed subject or substratum; but it is not something finished
and universal before it determines itself, nor yet before this
determination is superseded and idealised. It is will only when
its activity is self-occasioned, and it has returned into itself.

 Addition: What we properly call will contains
the two above-mentioned elements. The I is, first of all, as
such, pure activity, the universal which is by itself. Next this
universal determines itself, and so far is no longer by itself,
but establishes itself as another, and ceases to be the universal.
 The third step is that the will, while in this limitation, i.e.,
in this other, is by itself. While it limits itself, it yet remains
with itself, and does not lose its hold of the universal. This
is, then, the concrete conception of freedom, while the other
two elements have been thoroughly abstract and one-sided. But
this concrete freedom we already have in the form of perception,
as in friendship and love. Here a man is not one-sided, but limits
himself willingly in reference to another, and yet in this limitation
knows himself as himself. In this determination he does not feel
himself determined, but in the contemplation of the other as another
has the feeling of himself. Freedom also lies neither in indeterminateness
nor in determinateness, but in both. The wilful man has a will
which limits itself wholly to a particular object, and if he has
not this will, he supposes himself not to be free. But the will
is not bound to a particular object, but must go further, for
the nature of the will is not to be one-sided and confined. Free
will consists in willing a definite object, but in so doing to
be by itself and to return again into the universal.
 &sect; 8

If we define this particularising ([b] § 6) further, we reach
a distinction in the forms of the will. (a) In so far as the definite
character of the will consists in the formal opposition of the
subjective to the objective or external direct existence, we have
the formal will as a self consciousness which finds an outer world
before it. The process by which individuality turns back in its
definiteness into itself, is the translation of the subjective
end, through the intervention of an activity and a means, into
objectivity. In the absolute spirit, in which all definite character
is thoroughly its own and true ( Encyclopaedia . § 440 ),
consciousness is only one side, namely, the manifestation or appearance
of the will, a phase which does not require detailed consideration
here.

 Addition: The consideration of the definite
nature of the will belongs to the understanding, and is not in
the first instance speculative. The will as a whole, not only
in the sense of its content, but also in the sense of its form,
is determined. Determinate character on the side of form is the
end, and the execution of the end. The end is at first merely
something internal to me and subjective, but it is to be also
objective and to cast away the defect of mere subjectivity. It
may be asked, why it has this defect. When that which is deficient
does not at the same time transcend its defect, the defect is
for it not a defect at all. The animal is to us defective, but
not for itself. The end, in so far as it is at first merely ours,
is for us a defect, since freedom and will are for us the unity
of subjective and objective. The end must also be established
as objective; but does not in that way attain a new one-sided
character, but rather its realisation.

 &sect; 9

 (b). In so far as the definite phases of will
are its own peculiar property or its particularisation turned
back into itself, they are content. This content, as content
of the will, is for it, by virtue of the form given in (a), an
end, which exists on its inner or subjective side as the imaginative
will, but by the operation of the activity, which converts the
subjective into the objective, it is realised, completed end.

 &sect; 10

The content or determinate phase of will is in the first instance
direct or immediate. Then the will is free only in itself or
for us, i.e., it is the will in its conception. Only when it
has itself as an object is it also for itself, and its implicit
freedom becomes realised.

 Remark: At this standpoint the finite implies
that whatever is in itself, or according to its conception, has
an existence or manifestation different from what it is for itself.
 For example the abstract separateness of nature is in itself
space, but for itself time. Here, two things are to be observed,

1. that because the truth is the idea, when any object or phase
is apprehended only as it is in itself or in conception, it is
not as yet apprehended in its truth, and yet

2. that, whatever exists as conception or in itself, at the same
time exists, and this existence is a peculiar form of the object,
as e.g. space.

The separation of existence in-itself or implicit existence from
existence-for-itself or explicit existence is a characteristic
of the finite, and constitutes its appearance or merely external
reality. An example of this is to hand in the separation of the
natural will from formal right. The understanding adheres to
mere implicit existence, and in accordance with this position
calls freedom a capacity, since it is at this point only a possibility.
 But the understanding, regards this phase as absolute and perennial,
and considers the relation of the will to what it wills or reality
as an application to a given material, which does not belong to
the essence of freedom. In this way the understanding occupies
itself with mere abstractions, and not with the idea and truth.

 Addition: The will, which is will only according
to the conception, is free implicitly, but is at the same time
not free. To be truly free. it must have a truly fixed content;
then it is explicitly free, has freedom for its object, and is
freedom. What is at first merely in conception, i.e., implicit,
is only direct and natural, We are familiar with this in pictorial
thought also. The child is implicitly a man, at first has reason
implicitly, and is at first the possibility of reason and freedom.
 He is thus free merely according to the conception. That which
is only implicit does not yet exist in actuality. A man, who
is implicitly rational, must create himself by working through
and out of himself and by reconstructing himself within himself,
before he can become also explicitly rational.

 &sect; 11

The will, which is at first only implicitly free, is the direct
or natural will. The distinctive phases, which the self-determining
conception sets up in the will, appear in the direct will, as
a directly present content. They are impulses, appetites, inclinations,
by which the will finds itself determined by nature. Now this
content, with all its attendant phases, proceeds from the rationality
of the will, and is therefore implicitly rational; but let loose
in its immediate directness it has not as yet the form of rationality.
 The content is indeed for me and my own, but the form and the
content are yet different. The will is thus in itself finite.

 Note. Empirical psychology enumerates and describes
these impulses and inclinations, and the wants which are based
upon them. It takes, or imagines that it takes this material
from experience, and then seeks to classify it in the usual way.
 It will be stated below, what the objective side of impulse is,
and what impulse is in its truth, apart from the form of irrationality
which it has as an impulse, and also what shape it assumes when
it reaches existence.

 Addition: Impulse, appetite, inclination are
possessed by the animal also, but it has not will; it must obey
impulse, if there is no external obstacle. Man, however, is the
completely undetermined, and stands above impulse, and may fix
and set it up as his. Impulse is in nature, but it depends on
my will whether I establish it in the I. Nor can the will be unconditionally
called to this action by the fact that the impulse lies in nature.

 &sect; 12

The system of this content, as it occurs directly in the will,
exists only as a multitude or multiplicity of impulses, every
one of which is mine in a general way along with others, but is
at the same time universal and undetermined, having many objects
and ways of satisfaction. The will, by giving itself in this
two-fold indefiniteness the form of individuality ( § 7 ),
resolves, and only as resolving is it actual.

 Remark: Instead of to "resolve" ( beschließen ), i.e.
to supersede the indefinite condition in which a content is merely
possible, our language has the expression "unfold itself" ( sich entschließen ).
The indeterminate condition of the will,
as neutral but infinitely fruitful germ of all existence, contains
within itself its definite character and ends, and brings them
forth solely out of itself.

 &sect; 13

By resolution, will fixes itself as the will of a definite individual, and as thereby distinguishing itself from another. However apart from this finite character which it has as consciousness ( § 8 ), the immediate will is in virtue of the distinction between its form and its content formal. Hence its resolution as such is abstract, and its content is not yet the content and work of its freedom.

 Remark: To the intelligence, as thinking,
the object or content remains universal ; the intelligence retains
the form merely of a universal activity. Now the universal signifies
in will that which is mine, i.e. it is individuality. And yet,
also, the direct and formal will is abstract ; its individuality
is not yet filled with its free universality. Hence at the beginning
the peculiar finitude of the intelligence is in will, and only
by exalting itself again to thought and giving itself intrinsic
universality does the will transcend the distinction of form and
content and make itself objective infinite will. It is therefore
a misunderstanding of the nature of thought and will to suppose
that in the will man is infinite, while in thought and even in
reason he is limited. In so far as thought and will are still
distinct, the reverse is rather the case, and thinking reason,
when it becomes will, assigns itself to finitude.

 Addition: A will which resolves nothing, is
not an actual will; that which is devoid of definite character
never reaches a volition. The reason for hesitation may lie in
a sensitiveness, which is aware that in determining itself it
is engaged with what is finite, is assigning itself a limit, and
abandoning its infinity ; it may thus hold to its decision not
to renounce the totality which it intends. Such a feeling is dead,
even when it aims to be something beautiful. "Who will be
great," says Goethe, "must be able to limit himself."
By volition alone man enters actuality, however distasteful it
may be to him; for indolence will not desert its own self-brooding,
in which it clings to a universal possibility. But possibility
is not yet actuality. Hence the will, which is secure simply
of itself, does not as yet lose itself in any definite reality.
 &sect; 14

The finite will, which has merely from the standpoint of form
doubled itself back upon itself, and has become the infinite and
self-secluded I ( § 5 ),
stands above its content of different impulses and also above the several ways by which they are realised and satisfied. At the same time, as it is only formally infinite,
it is confined to this very content as the decisive feature of
its nature and external actuality, although it is undetermined
and not confined to one content rather than another ( §§ 6, 11 ). As to the return of the I into itself such a will
is only a possible will, which may or may not be mine, and the
I is only the possibility of deputing itself ( befruchten ) to this or that object.
Hence amongst these definite phases, which in this light are for
the I external, the will chooses.

 &sect; 15

Freedom of the will is, in this view of it, caprice, in which are
contained both a reflection, which is free and abstracted from
everything and a dependence upon a content or matter either internally
or externally provided. Since the content is in itself or implicitly
necessary as an end, and in opposition to this reflection is
a definite possibility, caprice, when it is will, is in its nature
contingent.

 Remark: The usual idea of freedom is that of
caprice. It is a midway stage of reflection between the will
as merely natural impulse and the will as free absolutely. When
it is said that freedom as a general thing consists in doing
what one likes, such an idea must be taken to imply an utter lack
of developed thought, containing as yet not even the suspicion
of what is meant by the absolutely free will, right, the ethical
system, etc. Reflection, being the formal universality and
unity of self-consciousness, is the will's abstract certitude
of its freedom, but it is not yet the truth of it, because it
has not as yet itself for content and end; the subjective side
is still different from the objective. Thus the content in such
a case remains purely and completely finite. Caprice, instead
of being will in its truth, is rather will in its contradiction.

In the controversy carried on, especially at the time of the metaphysic
of Wolf, as to whether the will is really free or our consciousness
of its freedom is a delusion, it was this caprice, which was in
the minds of both parties. Against the certitude of abstract
self-direction, determinism rightly opposed a content, which was
externally presented, and not being contained in this certitude
came from without. It did not matter whether this "without"
were impulse, imagination, or in general a consciousness so filled
that the content was not the peculiar possession of the self-activity
as such. Since only the formal element of free self-direction
is immanent in caprice, while the other element is something given
to it from without, to take caprice as freedom may fairly be named
a delusion. Freedom in every philosophy of reflection, whether
it be the Kantian or the Friesian, which is the Kantian superficialised,
is nothing more than this formal self-activity.

 Addition: Since I have the possibility
of determining myself in this or that way, since I have the power
of choice, possess caprice, or what is commonly called freedom.
This choice is due to the universality of the will, enabling me
to make my own this thing or another. This possession is a particular
content, which is therefore not adequate to me, but separated
from me, and is mine only in possibility; just as I am the possibility
of bringing myself into coincidence with it. Hence choice is
due to the indeterminateness of the I, and to the determinateness
of a content. But as to this content the will is not free, although
it has in itself formally the side of infinitude. No such content
corresponds to will ; in no content can it truly find itself.
 In caprice it is involved that the content is not formed by the
nature of my will, but by contingency. I am dependent upon this
content. This is the contradiction contained in caprice. Ordinary
man believes that he is free, when he is allowed to act capriciously,
but precisely in caprice is it inherent that he is not free.
When I will the rational, I do not act as a particular individual
but according to the conception of ethical life in general. In
an ethical act I establish not myself but the thing. A man, who
acts perversely, exhibits particularity. The rational is the
highway on which every one travels, and no one is specially marked.
 When a great artist finishes a work we say: "It must be
so." The particularity of the artist has wholly disappeared
and the work shows no mannerism. Phidias has no mannerism; the
statue itself lives and moves. But the poorer is the artist,
the more easily we discern himself, his particularity all caprice.
 If we adhere to the consideration that in caprice a man can will
what he pleases, we have certainly freedom of a kind; but again,
if we hold to the view that the content is given, then man must
be determined by it, and in this light is no longer free.

 &sect; 16

What is resolved upon and chosen (§ 14) the will may again
give up (§ 5). Yet, even with the possibility of transcending
any other content which it may substitute, and of proceeding in
this way ad infinitum, the will does not advance beyond
finitude, because every content in turn is different from the
form and is finite. The opposite aspect, namely indeterminateness,
irresolution or abstraction, is also one-sided.

 &sect; 17

Since the contradiction involved in caprice (§ 15) is the
dialectic of the impulses and inclinations, it is manifested in
their mutual antagonism. The satisfaction of one demands the
subjection and sacrifice of the satisfaction of another. Since
an impulse is merely the simple tendency of its own essential
nature, and has no measure in itself, to subject or sacrifice
the satisfaction of any impulse is a contingent decision of caprice.
 In such a case caprice may act upon the calculation as to which
impulse will bring the greater satisfaction, or may have some
other similar purpose.

 Addition: Impulses and inclinations are in the
first instance the content of will, and only reflection transcends
them. But these impulses are self-directing, crowding upon and
jostling one another, and all seeking to be satisfied. To set
all but one in the background, and put myself into this one, is
to limit and distort myself, since I, in so doing, renounce my
universality, which is a system of the impulses. Just as little
help is found in a mere subordination of them, a course usually
followed by the understanding. There is available no criterion
by which to make such an arrangement, and hence the demand for
a subordination is usually sustained by tedious and irrelevant
allusions to general savings.

 &sect; 18

With regard to the moral estimate of impulses, dialectic appears
in this form. The phases of the direct or natural will are immanent
and positive, and thus good. Hence man is by nature good. But
natural characteristics, since they are opposed to freedom and
the conception of the spirit, and are, hence, negative, must be
eradicated. Thus man is by nature evil. To decide for either
view is a matter of subjective caprice.

 Addition: The Christian doctrine that man is
by nature evil is loftier than the opposite that he is naturally
good, and is to be interpreted philosophically in this way. Man
as spirit is a free being, who need not give way to impulse.
Hence in his direct and unformed condition, man is in a situation
in which he ought not to be, and he must free himself. This is
the meaning of the doctrine of original sin, without which Christianity
would not be the religion of freedom.

 &sect; 19

In the demand that impulses must be purified is found the general
idea that they must be freed from the form of direct subjection
to nature, and from a content that is subjective and contingent,
and must be restored to their substantive essence. The truth
contained in this indefinite demand is that impulses should be
phases of will in a rational system. To apprehend them in this
way as proceeding from the conception is the content of the science
of right.

 Remark: The content of this science may, in all
its several elements, right, property, morality, family, state,
be represented in this way, that man has by nature the impulse
to right, the impulse to property, to morality, to sexual love,
and to social life. If instead of this form, which belongs to
empirical psychology, a philosophic form be preferred, it may
be obtained cheap from what, in modern times was reputed and still
is reputed to be philosophy. He will then say that man finds
in himself as a fact of consciousness that he wills right, property,
the state, etc. Later will be given still another form of the
content which appears here in the shape of impulses, that, namely,
of duties.

 &sect; 20

The reflection which is brought to bear upon impulses, placing
them before itself, estimating them, comparing them with one another,
and contrasting them with their means and consequences, and also
with a whole of satisfaction, namely happiness, brings the formal
universal to this material, and in an external way purifies it
of its crudity and barbarism. This propulsion by the universality
of thought is the absolute worth of civilisation [ Bildung ] ( § 187 ).

 Addition: In happiness thought has already the
upper hand with the force of natural impulse, since it is not
satisfied with what is momentary, but requires happiness as a
whole. This happiness is dependent upon civilisation [ Bildung ] to the extent
to which civilisation confirms the universal. But in the ideal
of happiness there are two elements. There is

a universal that is higher than all particulars; yet, as the
content of this universal is in turn only universal pleasure,
there arises once more the individual, particular and finite,
and retreat must be made to impulse;

Since the content of happiness lies in the subjective perception
of each individual, this universal end is again particular; nor
is there present in it any true unity of content and form.

 &sect; 21

But the truth of this formal universality, which taken by itself
is undetermined and finds definite character in externally given
material, is the self-directing universality which is will or
freedom. Since the will has as its object, content and end, universality
itself, and thus assumes the form of the infinite, it is free
not only in itself or implicitly, but for itself or explicitly.
 It is the true idea.

 Remark: The self-consciousness of the will in the form of appetite
or impulse is sensible, the sensible in general indicating the
externality of self-consciousness, or that condition in which
self-consciousness is outside of itself. Now this sensible side
is one of the two elements of the reflecting will, and the other
is the abstract universality of thought. But the absolute will
has as its object the will itself as such in its pure universality.
 In this universality the directness of the natural will is superseded,
and so also is the private individuality which is produced by
reflection and infects the natural condition. But to supersede
these and lift them into the universal, constitutes the activity
of thought. Thus the self-consciousness, which purifies its object,
content or end, and exalts it to universality, is thought carrying
itself through into will. It is at this point that it becomes
clear that the will is true and free only as thinking intelligence.
 The slave knows not his essence, his infinitude, his freedom;
he does not know himself in his essence, and not to know himself
is not to think himself. The self-consciousness, which by thought
apprehends that itself is essence, and thus puts away from itself
the accidental and untrue, constitutes the principle of right,
morality, and all forms of ethical life. They who, in speaking
philosophically of right, morality, and ethical life, would exclude
thought and turn to feeling, the heart, the breast, and inspiration,
express the deepest contempt for thought and science. And science
itself, overwhelmed with despair and utter insipidity, makes barbarism
and absence of thought a principle, and so far as in it lay robbed
men of all truth, dignity, and worth.

 Addition: In philosophy truth is had when the
conception corresponds to reality. A body is the reality, and
soul is the conception. Soul and body should be adequate to each
other. A dead man is still an existence, but no longer a true
existence; it is a reality void of conception. For that reason
the dead body decays. So with the true will; that which it wills,
namely, its content, is identical with it, and so freedom wills
freedom.

 &sect; 22

The will which exists absolutely is truly infinite, because its
object being the will itself, is for it not another or a limitation.
 In the object the will has simply reverted into itself. Moreover,
it is not mere possibility, capacity, potentiality (potential,
but infinitely actual ( infinitum actu ), because the reality
of the conception or its visible externality is internal to itself.

 Remark: Hence when the free will is spoken of
without the qualification of absolute freedom, only the capacity
of freedom is meant, or the natural and finite will ( § 11 ),
and, notwithstanding all words and opinions to the contrary, not
the free will. Since the understanding comprehends the infinite
only in its negative aspect, and hence as a beyond, it thinks
to do the infinite all the more honour the farther it removes
it into the vague distance, and the more it takes it as a foreign
thing. In free will the true infinite is present and real; it
is itself the actually present self-contained idea.

 Addition: The infinite has rightly been represented
as a circle. The straight line goes out farther and farther,
and symbolises the merely negative and bad infinite, which, unlike
the true, does not return into itself. The free will is truly
infinite, for it is not a mere possibility or disposition. Its
external reality is its own inner nature, itself.

 &sect; 23

Only in this freedom is the will wholly by itself, because it
refers to nothing but itself, and all dependence upon any other
thing falls away. The will is true, or rather truth itself, because
its character consists in its being in its manifested reality,
or correlative opposite, what it is in its conception. In other
words, the pure conception has the perception or intuition of
itself as its end and reality.

 &sect; 24

The will is universal, because in it all limitation and particular
individuality are superseded. These one-sided phases are found
only in the difference between the conception and its object or
content, or, from another standpoint, in the difference between
the conscious independent existence of the subject, and the will's
implicit, or self-involved existence, or between its excluding
and concluding individuality, and its universality.

 Remark: The different phases of universality are
tabulated in the logic ( Encyclopaedia. of the Phil. Sciences , 3rd ed.,
 §§ 169-178 ). Imaginative thinking always takes universality
in an abstract and external way. But absolute universality is
not to be thought of either as the universality of reflection,
which is a kind of consensus or generality, or, as the abstract
universality and self-identity, which is fashioned by the understanding
( § 6, note ), and keeps aloof from the individual.
 It is rather the concrete, self-contained, and self-referring
universality, which is the substance, intrinsic genus, or immanent
idea of self-consciousness. It is a conception of free will as
the universal, transcending its object, passing through and beyond
its own specific character, and then becoming identical with itself.
 This absolute universal is what is in general called the rational,
and is to be apprehended only in this speculative way.

 &sect; 25

The subjective side of the will is the side of its self-consciousness and individuality ( § 7 ), as distinguished from its implicit conception. This subjectivity is

 [a] pure form or absolute unity of self-consciousness with itself. This unity is the equation " I = I," consciousness being characterised by a thoroughly inward and abstract self-dependence. It is pure certitude of itself in contrast with the truth;

 [b] particularity of will, as caprice with its accidental content of pleasurable ends;

 [c] in general a one-sided form ( § 8 ), in so far as that which is willed is at first an unfulfilled end, or a content which simply belongs to self-consciousness.

 &sect; 26

 [a] In so far as free will is determined by itself, and is in accord with its conception and true, it is wholly objective will.

 [b] But objective self-consciousness, which has not the form of the infinite, is a will sunk in its object or condition, whatever the content of that may be. It is the will of the child, or the will present in slavery or superstition.

 [c] Objectivity is finally a one-sided form in opposition to the subjective phase of will ; it is direct reality, or external existence. In this sense the will becomes objective only by the execution of its ends.

 Remark: These logical phases of subjectivity and
objectivity, since they are often made use of in the sequel, are
here exposed, with the express purpose of noting that it happens
with them as with other distinctions and opposed aspects of reflection;
they by virtue of their finite and dialectic character pass over
into their opposites. For imagination and understanding the meanings
of antithetic phases are not convertible, because their identity
is still internal. But in will, on the contrary, these phases,
which ought to be at once abstract and yet also sides of that
which can be known only as concrete, lead of themselves to identity,
and to an exchange of meaning. To the understanding this is unintelligible.
 Thus, e.g., the will, as a freedom which exists in itself, is
subjectivity itself; thus subjectivity is the conception of the
will, and therefore its objectivity. But subjectivity is finite
in opposition to objectivity, yet in this opposition the will
is not isolated, but in intricate union with the object ; and
thus its finitude consists quite as much in its not being subjective,
etc. What in the sequel is to be meant by the subjective or the
objective side of the will, has each time to be made clear from
the context, which will supply their positions in relation to
the totality.

 Addition: It is ordinarily supposed that subjective
and objective are blank opposites ; but this is not the case.
 Rather do they pass into one another, for they are not abstract
aspects like positive and negative, but have already a concrete
significance. To consider in the first instance the expression
"subjective;" this may mean an end which is merely the
end of a certain subject. In this sense a poor work of art, that
is not adequate to the thing is merely subjective. But, further,
this expression may point to the content of the will, and is then
of about the same meaning as capricious; the subjective content
then is that which belongs merely to the subject. In this sense
bad acts are merely subjective. Further, the pure, empty I may
be called subjective, as it has only itself as an object, and
possesses the power of abstraction from all further content.
Subjectivity has, moreover, a wholly particular and correct meaning
in accordance with which anything, in order to win recognition
from me, has to become mine and seek validity in me. This is
the infinite avarice of subjectivity, eager to comprehend and
consume everything within the simple and pure I.

Similarly we may take the objective in different ways. By it
we may understand anything to which we give existence in contrast
to ourselves, whether it be an actual thing or a mere thought,
which we place over against ourselves. By it also we understand
the direct reality, in which the end is to be realised. Although
the end itself is quite particular and subjective, we yet name
it objective after it has made its appearance. Further, the objective
will is also that in which truth is; thus, God's will, the ethical
will also, are objective. Lastly, we may call the will objective,
when it is wholly submerged in its object, as, e.g., the
child's will, which is confiding and without subjective freedom,
and the slave's will, which does not know itself as free, and
is thus a will-less will. In this sense any will is objective,
if it is guided in its action by a foreign authority, and has
not yet completed the infinite return into itself.

 &sect; 27

The absolute character or, if you like, the absolute impulse of the free spirit ( § 21 ) is, as has been observed, that its freedom shall be for it an object. It is to be objective in a two-fold sense: it is the rational system of itself, and this system is to be directly real ( § 26 ). There is thus actualised as idea what the will is implicitly. Hence, the abstract conception of the idea of the will is in general the free will which wills the free will.

 &sect; 28

The activity of the will, directed to the task of transcending the contradiction between subjectivity and objectivity, of transferring its end from subjectivity into objectivity, and yet while in objectivity of remaining with itself, is beyond the formal method of consciousness ( § 8 ), in which objectivity is only direct actuality. This activity is the essential development of the substantive content of the idea ( § 21 ). In this development the conception moulds the idea, which is in the first instance abstract, into the totality of a system. This totality as substantive is independent of the opposition between mere subjective end and its realisation, and in both of these forms is the same.

 &sect; 29

That a reality is the realisation of the free will, this is what
is meant by a right. Right, therefore, is, in general, freedom
as idea.

 Remark: In the Kantian doctrine (Introduction
to Kant's Theory of Right ), now generally accepted, "the
highest factor is a limitation of my freedom or caprice, in order
that it may be able to subsist alongside of every other individual's
caprice in accordance with a universal law." This doctrine
contains only a negative phase, that of limitation. And besides,
the positive phase, the universal law or so-called law of reason,
consisting in the agreement of the caprice of one with that of
another, goes beyond the well-known formal identity and the proposition
of contradiction. The definition of right, just quoted, contains
the view which has especially since Rousseau spread widely. According
to this view neither the absolute and rational will, nor the true
spirit, but the will and spirit of the particular individual in
their peculiar caprice, are the substantive and primary basis.
 When once this principle is accepted, the rational can announce
itself only as limiting this freedom. Hence it is not an inherent
rationality, but only a mere external and formal universal. This
view is accordingly devoid of speculative thought, and is rejected
by the philosophic conception. In the minds of men and in the
actual world it has assumed a shape, whose horror is without a
parallel, except in the shallowness of the thoughts upon which
it was founded.

 &sect; 30

Right in general is something holy, because it is the embodiment
of the absolute conception and self-conscious freedom. But the
formalism of right, and after a while of duty also, is due to
distinctions arising out of the development of the conception
of freedom. In contrast with the more formal, abstract and limited
right, there is that sphere or stage of the spirit, in which spirit
has brought to definite actuality the further elements contained
in the idea. This stage is the richer and more concrete; it is
truly universal and has therefore a higher right.

 Remark: Every step in the development of the idea
of freedom has its peculiar right, because it is the embodiment
of a phase of freedom. When morality and ethical life are spoken
of in opposition to right, only the first or formal right of the
abstract personality is meant. Morality, ethical life, a state-interest,
are every one a special right, because each of these is a definite
realisation of freedom. They can come into collision only in
so far as they occupy the same plane. If the moral standpoint
of spirit were not also a right and one of the forms of freedom,
it could not collide with the right of personality or any other right. A right
contains the conception of freedom which is the highest phase
of spirit, and in opposition to it any other kind of thing is
lacking in real substance. Yet collision also implies a limit
and a subordination of one phase to another. Only the right of
the world-spirit is the unlimited absolute.

 &sect; 31

The scientific method by which the conception is self-evolved,
and its phases self-developed and self-produced, is not first
of all an assurance that certain relations are given from somewhere
or other, and then the application to this foreign material of
the universal. The true process is found in the logic, and here
is presupposed.

 Remark: The efficient or motive principle, which
is not merely the analysis but the production of the several elements
of the universal, I call dialectic. Dialectic is not that process
in which an object or proposition, presented, to feeling or the
direct consciousness, is analysed, entangled, taken hither and
thither, until at last its contrary is derived. Such a merely
negative method appears frequently in Plato. It may fix the opposite
of any notion, or reveal the contradiction contained in it, as
did the ancient scepticism, or it may in a feeble way consider
an approximation to truth, or modern half-and-half attainment
of it, as its goal. But the higher dialectic of the conception
does not merely apprehend any phase as a limit and opposite, but
produces out of this negative a positive content and result.
Only by such a course is there development and inherent progress.
 Hence this dialectic is not the external agency of subjective
thinking, but the private soul of the content, which unfolds its
branches and fruit organically. Thought regards this development
of the idea and of the peculiar activity of the reason of the
idea as only subjective, but is on its side unable to make any
addition. To consider anything rationally is not to bring reason
to it from the outside, and work it up in this way, but to count
it as itself reasonable. Here it is spirit in its freedom, the
summit of self-conscious reason, which gives itself actuality,
and produces itself as the existing world. The business of science
is simply to bring the specific work of the reason, which is in
the thing, to consciousness.

 &sect; 32

The phases of the development of the conception are themselves
conceptions. And yet, because the conception is essentially the
idea, they have the form of manifestations. Hence the sequence
of the conceptions, which arise in this way, is at the same time
a sequence of realisations, and are to be by science so considered.

 Remark: In a speculative sense, the way in which
a conception is manifested in reality, is identical with a definite
phase of the conception. But it is noteworthy that, in the scientific
development of the idea, the elements, which result in a further
definite form, although preceding this result as phases of the
conception, do not in the temporal development go before it as
concrete realisations. Thus, as will be seen later, that stage
of the idea which is the family presupposes phases of the conception,
whose result it is. But that these internal presuppositions should
be present in such visible realisations as right of property,
contract, morality, etc., this is the other side of the process,
which only in a highly developed civilisation has attained to
a specific realisation of its elements.

 Addition: The idea must always go on determining
itself within itself, since at the beginning it is only abstract
conception. However, this initial abstract conception is never
given up, but only becomes inwardly richer, the last phase being
the richest. The earlier and merely implicit phases reach in
this way free self-dependence, but in such a manner that the conception
remains the soul which holds everything together, and only through
a procedure immanent within itself arrives at its own distinctions.
 Hence the last phase falls again into a unity with the first,
and it cannot be said that the conception ever comes to something
new. Although the elements of the conception appear to have fallen
apart when they enter reality, this is only a mere appearance.
 Its superficial character is revealed in the process, since all
the particulars finally turn back again into the conception of
the universal. The empirical sciences usually analyse what they
find in pictorial ideas, and if the individual is successfully
brought back to the general, the general property is then called
the conception. But this is not our procedure. We desire only
to observe how the conception determines itself, and compels us
to keep at a distance everything of our own spinning and thinking.
 But what we get in this way is one series of thoughts and another
series of realised forms. As to these two series, it may happen
that the order of time of the actual manifestations is partly
different from the order of the conception. Thus it cannot, e.g.,
be said that property existed before the family, and yet, in spite
of that it is discussed before the family is discussed. The question
might also be raised here, Why do we not begin with the highest,
i.e., with concrete truth ? The answer is, because we desire to
see truth in the form of a result, and it is an essential part
of the process to conceive the conception first of all as abstract.
 The actual series of realisations of the conception is thus for
us in due course as follows, even although in actuality the order
should be the same. Our process is this, that the abstract forms
reveal themselves not as self-subsistent but as untrue.

 Division of the Work.

 &sect; 33

According to the stages in the development of the idea of the absolutely free will,

 A. The will is direct or immediate; its conception
is therefore, abstract, i.e., personality, and its embodied reality
is a direct external thing. This is the sphere of abstract or
formal right.

 B. The will, passing out of external reality,
turns back into itself. Its phase is subjective individuality,
and it is contrasted with the universal. This universal is on
its internal side the good, and on its external side a presented
world, and these two sides are occasioned only by means of each
other. In this sphere the idea is divided, and exists in separate
elements. The right of the subjective will is in a relation of
contrast to the right of the world, or the right of the idea.
 Here, however, the idea exists only implicitly. This is the
sphere of morality.

 C. The unity and truth of these two abstract
elements. The thought idea of the good is realised both in the
will turned back into itself, and also in the external world.
 Thus freedom exists as real substance, which is quite as much
actuality and necessity as it is subjective will. The idea here
is its absolutely universal existence, viz., ethical life. This
ethical substance is again,

 a. Natural spirit; the family,

 b. The civil society, or spirit in its dual existence and mere appearance,

 c. The state, or freedom, which, while established
in the free self-dependence of the particular will is also universal and objective. This actual and organic spirit [a] is the spirit of a nation, [b] is found in the relation to one another of national spirits, and [c] passing through and beyond this relation is actualised and revealed in world history as the universal world-spirit, whose right is the highest.

 Note. It is to be found in the speculative logic, and here is presupposed, that a thing or content, which is established first of all according to its conception, or implicitly, has the form of direct existence. The conception, however, when
it has the form of the conception is explicit, and no longer is a direct existence. So, too, the principle, upon which the division of this work proceeds, is presupposed. The divisions might be regarded as already settled by history, since the different stages must be viewed as elements in the development of the idea, and therefore as springing from the nature of the content itself. A philosophic division is not an external classification of any given material, such a classification as would be made according to one or several schemes picked up at random, but the inherent distinctions of the conception itself. Morality and ethical life,
which are usually supposed to mean the same thing, are here taken in essentially different meanings. Meanwhile even imaginative thought seems to make a distinction between them. In the usage of Kant the preference is given to the term morality, and the practical principles of his philosophy limit themselves wholly to this standpoint, making impossible the standpoint of ethical life, and indeed expressly destroying and abolishing it. Although morality and ethics have the same meaning according to their etymology, yet these different words may be used for different conceptions.

 Addition: When we speak of right, we mean not
only civil right, which is the usual significance of the word,
but also morality, ethical life and world-history. These belong
to this realm, because the conception taking them in their truth,
brings them all together. Free will, in order not to remain abstract,
must in the first instance give itself reality; the sensible materials
of this reality are objects, i.e., external things. This first
phase of freedom we shall know as property. This is the sphere
of formal and abstract right, to which belong property in the
more developed form of contract and also the injury of right,
i.e., crime and punishment. The freedom, we have here, we name
person, or, in other words, the subject who is free, and indeed
free independently, and gives himself a reality in things. But
this direct reality is not adequate to freedom, and the negation
of this phase is morality. In morality I am beyond the freedom
found directly in this thing, and have a freedom in which this
directness is superseded. I am free in myself, i.e., in the subjective.
 In this sphere we come upon my insight, intention, and end, and
externality is established as indifferent. The good is now the
universal end, which is not to remain merely internal to me, but
to realise itself. The subjective will demands that its inward
character, or purpose, shall receive external reality, and also
that the good shall be brought to completion in external existence.
 Morality, like formal right, is also an abstraction, whose truth
is reached only in ethical life. Hence ethical life is the unity
of the will in its conception with the will of the individual
or subject. The primary reality of ethical life is in its turn
natural, taking the form of love and feeling. This is the family.
 In it the individual has transcended his prudish personality,
and finds himself with his consciousness in a totality. In the
next stage is seen the loss of this peculiar ethical existence
and substantive unity. Here the family falls asunder, and the
members become independent one of another, being now held together
merely by the bond of mutual need. This is the stage of the civil
society, which has frequently been taken for the state. But the
state does not arise until we reach the third stage, that stage
of ethical life or spirit, in which both individual independence
and universal substantivity are found in gigantic union. The
right of the state is, therefore, higher than that of the other
stages. It is freedom in its most concrete embodiment, which
yields to nothing but the highest absolute truth of the world-spirit.

 Abstract Right (next section)

 Hegel-by-HyperText Home Page @ marxists.org