Hegel's Philosophy of Right: The State

 Hegel's Philosophy of Right

 Third Part: Ethical Life

iii. The State

 2. Sovereignty vis-&agrave;-vis foreign States

 &sect; 321

Sovereignty at home (see § 278 ) is this ideality in
the sense that the moments of mind and its actuality, the state,
have become developed in their necessity and subsist as the organs
of the state. Mind in its freedom is an infinitely negative relation
to itself and hence its essential character from its own point
of view is its singleness, a singleness which has incorporated
these subsistent differences into itself and so is a unit, exclusive
of other units. So characterised, the state has individuality,
and individuality is in essence an individual, and in the sovereign
an actual, immediate individual (see § 279).

 &sect; 322

Individuality is awareness of one's existence as a unit
in sharp distinction from others. It manifests itself here in
the state as a relation to other states, each of which is autonomous
vis-a-vis the others. This autonomy embodies mind's actual awareness
of itself as a unit and hence it is the most fundamental freedom
which a people possesses as well as its highest dignity.

 Remark: Those who talk of the 'wishes' of a collection
of people constituting a more or less autonomous state with its
own centre, of its 'wishes' to renounce this centre and its autonomy
in order to unite with others to form a new whole, have very little
knowledge of the nature of a collection or of the feeling of selfhood
which a nation possesses in its independence.

Thus the dominion which a state has at its first entry into history
is this bare autonomy, even if it be quite abstract and without
further inner development. For this reason, to have an individual
at its head - a patriarch, a chieftain, &c. - is appropriate
to this original appearance of the state.

 &sect; 323

This negative relation of the state to itself is embodied
in the world as the relation of one state to another and as if
the negative were something external. In the world of existence,
therefore, this negative relation has the shape of a happening
and an entanglement with chance events coming from without. But
in fact this negative relation is that moment in the state which
is most supremely its own, the state's actual infinity as the
ideality of everything finite within it. It is the moment wherein
the substance of the state - i.e. its absolute power against everything
individual and particular, against life, property, and their rights,
even against societies and associations - makes the nullity of
these finite things an accomplished fact and brings it home to
consciousness.

 &sect; 324

This destiny whereby the rights and interests of individuals
are established as a passing phase, is at the same time the positive
moment, i.e. the positing of their absolute, not their contingent
and unstable, individuality. This relation and the recognition
of it is therefore the individual's substantive duty, the duty
to maintain this substantive individuality, i.e. the independence
and sovereignty of the state, at the risk and the sacrifice of
property and life, as well as of opinion and everything else naturally
comprised in the compass of life.

 Remark: An entirely distorted account of the
demand for this sacrifice results from regarding the state as
a mere civil society and from regarding its final end as only
the security of individual life and property. This security cannot
possibly be obtained by the sacrifice of what is to be secured
- on the contrary.

The ethical moment in war is implied in what has been said in
this paragraph. War is not to be regarded as an absolute evil
and as a purely external accident, which itself therefore has
some accidental cause, be it injustices, the passions of nations
or the holders of power, &c., or in short, something or other
which ought not to be. It is to what is by nature accidental
that accidents happen, and the fate whereby they happen is thus
a necessity. Here as elsewhere, the point of view from which
things seem pure accidents vanishes if we look at them in the
light of the concept and philosophy, because philosophy knows
accident for a show and sees in it its essence, necessity. It
is necessary that the finite - property and life - should be definitely
established as accidental, because accidentality is the concept
of the finite. From one point of view this necessity appears
in the form of the power of nature, and everything is mortal and
transient. But in the ethical substance, the state, nature is
robbed of this power, and the necessity is exalted to be the work
of freedom, to be something ethical. The transience of the finite
becomes a willed passing away, and the negativity lying at the
roots of the finite becomes the substantive individuality proper
to the ethical substance.

War is the state of affairs which deals in earnest with the vanity
of temporal goods and concerns - a vanity at other times a common
theme of edifying sermonising. This is what makes it the moment
in which the ideality of the particular attains its right and
is actualised. War has the higher significance that by its agency,
as I have remarked elsewhere, 'the ethical health of peoples
is preserved in their indifference to the stabilisation of finite
institutions; just as the blowing of the winds preserves the sea
from the foulness which would be the result of a prolonged calm,
so also corruption in nations would be the product of prolonged,
let alone 'perpetual', peace.' This, however, is said to be only
a philosophic idea, or, to use another common expression, a 'justification
of Providence', and it is maintained that actual wars require
some other justification. On this point, see below.

The ideality which is in evidence in war, i.e. in an accidental
relation of a state to a foreign state, is the same as the ideality
in accordance with which the domestic powers of the state are
organic moments in a whole. This fact appears in history in various
forms, e.g. successful wars have checked domestic unrest and consolidated
the power of the state at home. Other phenomena illustrate the
same point: e.g. peoples unwilling or afraid to tolerate sovereignty
at home have been subjugated from abroad, and they have struggled
for their independence with the less glory and success the less
they have been able previously to organise the powers of the state
in home affairs - their freedom has died from the fear of dying;
states whose autonomy has been guaranteed not by their armed forces
but in other ways (e.g. by their disproportionate smallness in
comparison with their neighbours) have been able to subsist with
a constitution of their own which by itself would not have assured
peace in either home or foreign affairs.

 Addition: In peace civil life continually expands;
all its departments wall themselves in, and in the long run men
stagnate. Their idiosyncrasies become continually more fixed
and ossified. But for health the unity of the body is required,
and if its parts harden themselves into exclusiveness, that is
death. Perpetual peace is often advocated as an ideal towards
which humanity should strive. With that end in view, Kant proposed
a league of monarchs to adjust differences between states, and
the Holy Alliance was meant to be a league of much the same kind.
 But the state is an individual, and individuality essentially
implies negation. Hence even if a number of states make themselves
into a family, this group as an individual must engender an opposite
and create an enemy. As a result of war, nations are strengthened,
but peoples involved in civil strife also acquire peace at home
through making wars abroad. To be sure, war produces insecurity
of property, but this insecurity of things is nothing but their
transience which is inevitable. We hear plenty of sermons from
the pulpit about the insecurity, vanity, and instability - of temporal
things, but everyone thinks, however much he is moved by what
he hears, that he at least will be able to retain his own. But
if this insecurity now comes on the scene in the form of hussars
with shining sabres and they actualise in real earnest what the
preachers have said, then the moving and edifying discourses which
foretold all these events turn into curses against the invader.
 Be that as it may, the fact remains that wars occur when the
necessity of the case requires. The seeds burgeon once more,
and harangues are silenced by the solemn cycles of history.

 &sect; 325

Sacrifice on behalf of the individuality of the state is
the substantial tie between the state and all its members and
so is a universal duty. Since this tie is a single aspect of
the ideality, as contrasted with the reality, of subsistent particulars,
it becomes at the same time a particular tie, and those who are
in it form a class of their own with the characteristic of courage.

 &sect; 326

The matter at issue in disputes between states may be only
one particular aspect of their relation to each other, and it
is for such disputes that the particular class devoted to the
state's defence is principally appointed. But if the state as
such, if its autonomy, is in jeopardy, all its citizens are in
duty bound to answer the summons to its defence. If in such circumstances
the entire state is under arms and is torn from its domestic life
at home to fight abroad, the war of defence turns into a war of
conquest.

 Remark: The armed force of the state becomes
a standing army, while its appointment to the particular task
of state defence makes it a class. This happens from the same
necessity as compels other particular moments, interests, and
activities in the state to crystallise into a given status or
class, e.g. into the status of marriage or into the business or
civil servant class, or into the Estates of the Realm. Ratiocination,
running hither and thither from ground to consequent, launches
forth into reflections about the relative advantages and disadvantages
of standing armies. Opinion readily decides that the latter preponderate,
partly because the concept of a thing is harder to grasp than
its single and external aspects, but also because particular interests
and ends (the expense of a standing army, and its result, higher
taxation, &c.) are rated in the consciousness of civil society
more highly than what is necessary in and by itself. In this
way the latter comes to count only as a means to particular ends.

 &sect; 327

In itself, courage is a formal virtue, because (i) it is
a display of freedom by radical abstraction from all particular
ends, possessions, pleasure, and life; but (ii) this negation
is a negation of externalities, and their alienation, the culmination
of courage, is not intrinsically of a spiritual ( geistiger ) character;
(iii) the courageous man's inner motive need only be some particular
reason or other, and even the actual result of what he does need
be present solely to the minds of others and not to his own.

 Addition: The military class is that universal
class which is charged with the defence of the state, and its
duty is to make real the ideality implicit within itself, i.e.
to sacrifice itself. Courage to be sure is multiform. The mettle
of an animal or a brigand, courage for the sake of honour, the
courage of a knight, these are not true forms of courage. The
true courage of civilised nations is readiness for sacrifice in
the service of the state, so that the individual counts as only
one amongst many. The important thing here is not personal mettle
but aligning oneself with the universal. In India five hundred
men conquered twenty thousand who were not cowards, but who only
lacked this disposition to work in close co-operation with others.

 &sect; 328

The intrinsic worth of courage as a disposition of mind
is to be found in the genuine, absolute, final end, the sovereignty
of the state. The work of courage is to actualise this final
end, and the means to this end is the sacrifice of personal actuality.
 This form of experience thus contains the harshness of extreme
contradictions: a self-sacrifice which yet is the real existence
of one's freedom; the maximum self-subsistence of individuality,
yet only as a cog playing its part in the mechanism of an external
organisation; absolute obedience, renunciation of personal opinions
and reasonings, in fact complete absence of mind, coupled with
the most intense and comprehensive presence of mind and decision
in the moment of acting; the most hostile and so most personal
action against individuals, coupled with an attitude of complete
indifference or even liking towards them as individuals.

 Remark: To risk one's life is better than merely
fearing death, but is still purely negative and so indeterminate
and without value in itself. It is the positive aspect, the end
and content, which first gives significance to this spiritedness.
 Robbers and murderers bent on crime as their end, adventurers
pursuing ends planned to suit their own whims, &c., these
too have spirit enough to risk their lives.

The principle of the modern world - thought and the universal - has
given courage a higher form, because its display now seems to
be more mechanical, the act not of this particular person, but
of a member of a whole. Moreover, it seems to be turned not against
single persons, but against a hostile group, and hence personal
bravery appears impersonal. It is for this reason that thought.
has invented the gun, and the invention of this weapon, which
has changed the purely personal form of bravery into a more abstract
one, is no accident.

 &sect; 329

The state's tendency to look abroad lies in the fact that
it is an individual subject. Its relation to other states therefore
falls to the power of the crown. Hence it directly devolves on
the monarch, and on him alone, to command the armed forces, to
conduct foreign affairs through ambassadors &c., to make war
and peace, and to conclude treaties of all kinds.

 Addition: In almost all European countries the
individual head of the state is the monarch, and foreign affairs
are his business. Where the Estates have constitutional powers,
the question may arise whether they should not decide on war and
peace, and in any case they have their influence on the question,
particularly in connection with ways and means. In England, for
example, no unpopular war care be waged. If, however, it is supposed
that monarchs and cabinets are more subject to passion than parliaments
are, and if for this reason an attempt is made to juggle the decision
on war and peace into the hands of the latter, then we must point
out that whole peoples may often be a prey to excitement or be
carried away by passion to a greater extent than their leaders.
 In England the whole nation has frequently pressed for war and
to a certain extent compelled ministers to wage it. The popularity
of Pitt was due to his knowing how to fall in with what the people
wanted at the time. It was only later that the people cooled down
and so began to reflect that the war was useless and unnecessary
and had been undertaken without counting the cost. Moreover,
a state stands in relation not with one other state only, but
with many. And the complexities of their relations become so
delicate that they can be handled only by the head of the state.

 B. International Law - C. World History

 Hegel-by-HyperText Home Page @ marxists.org