Who Thinks Abstractly?

 Hegel-by-HyperText

 Who Thinks Abstractly?

 Written : by Hegel c. 1808;

 Source : Kaufmann, Walter. Hegel: Texts and Commentary ;

 Published : Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1966, pp. 113-118.

Think? Abstractly? - Sauve qui peut! Let those who can
 save themselves! Even now I can hear a traitor, bought by the enemy, exclaim
 these words, denouncing this essay because it will plainly deal with metaphysics.
 For metaphysics is a word, no less than abstract, and almost thinking
 as well, from which everybody more or less runs away as from a man who has
 caught the plague.

But the intention here really is not so wicked, as if the meaning
 of thinking and of abstract were to be explained here. There is nothing the
 beautiful world finds as intolerable as explanations. I, too, find it terrible
 when somebody begins to explain, for when worst comes to worst I understand
 everything myself. Here the explanation of thinking and abstract would in any
 case be entirely superfluous; for it is only because the beautiful world knows
 what it means to be abstract that it runs away. Just as one does not desire
 what one does not know, one also cannot hate it. Nor is it my intent to try
 craftily to reconcile the beautiful world with thinking or with the abstract
 as if, under the semblance of small talk, thinking and the abstract were to
 be put over till in the end they had found their way into society incognito,
 without having aroused any disgust; even as if they were to be adopted imperceptibly
 by society, or, as the Swabians say, hereingez&auml;unselt, before the
 author of this complication suddenly exposed this strange guest, namely the
 abstract, whom the whole party had long treated and recognized under a different
 title as if he were a good old acquaintance. Such scenes of recognition which
 are meant to instruct the world against its will have the inexcusable fault
 that they simultaneously humiliate, and the wirepuller tries with his artifice
 to gain a little fame; but this humiliation and this vanity destroy the effect, for they push away again an instruction gained at such a price.

In any case, such a plan would be ruined from the start, for
 it would require that the crucial word of the riddle is not spoken at the outset.
 But this has already happened in the title. If this essay toyed with such craftiness,
 these words should not have been allowed to enter right in the beginning; but
 like the cabinet member in a comedy, they should have been required to walk
 around during the entire play in their overcoat, unbuttoning it only in the
 last scene, disclosing the flashing star of wisdom. The unbuttoning of the metaphysical
 overcoat would be less effective, to be sure, than the unbuttoning of the minister's:
 it would bring to light no more than a couple of words, and the best part of
 the joke ought to be that it is shown that society has long been in possession
 of the matter itself; so what they would gain in the end would be the mere name,
 while the minister's star signifies something real - a bag of money.

That everybody present should know what thinking is and what
 is abstract is presupposed in good society, and we certainly are in good society.
 The question is merely who thinks abstractly. The intent, as already
 mentioned, is not to reconcile society with these things, to expect it to deal
 with something difficult, to appeal to its conscience not frivolously to neglect
 such a matter that befits the rank and status of beings gifted with reason.
 Rather it is my intent to reconcile the beautiful world with itself, although
 it does not seem to have a bad conscience about this neglect; still, at least
 deep down, it has a certain respect for abstract thinking as something exalted,
 and it looks the other way not because it seems too lowly but because it appears
 too exalted, not because it seems too mean but rather too noble, or conversely
 because it seems an Esp&egrave;ce, something special; it seems something
 that does not lend one distinction in general society, like new clothes, but
 rather something that - like wretched clothes, or rich ones if they are decorated
 with precious stones in ancient mounts or embroidery that, be it ever so rich,
 has long become quasi-Chinese - excludes one from society or makes one ridiculous
 in it.

Who thinks abstractly? The uneducated, not the educated. Good society does
 not think abstractly because it is too easy, because it is too lowly (not referring
 to the external status) - not from an empty affectation of nobility that would
 place itself above that of which it is not capable, but on account of the inward
 inferiority of the matter.

The prejudice and respect for abstract thinking
 are so great that sensitive nostrils will begin to smell some satire or irony
 at this point; but since they read the morning paper they know that there is
 a prize to be had for satires and that I should therefore sooner earn it by
 competing for it than give up here without
 further ado.

I have only to adduce examples for my proposition:
 everybody will grant that they confirm it. A murderer is led to the place of
 execution. For the common populace he is nothing but a murderer. Ladies perhaps
 remark that he is a strong, handsome, interesting man. The populace finds this
 remark terrible: What? A murderer handsome? How can one think so wickedly and
 call a murderer handsome; no doubt, you yourselves are something not much better!
 This is the corruption of morals that is prevalent in the upper classes, a priest
 may add, knowing the bottom of things and human hearts.

One who knows men traces the development of the criminal's
 mind: he finds in his history, in his education, a bad family relationship between
 his father and mother, some tremendous harshness after this human being had
 done some minor wrong, so he became embittered against the social order - a first
 reaction to this that in effect expelled him and henceforth did not make it
 possible for him to preserve himself except through crime. - There may be people
 who will say when they hear such things: he wants to excuse this murderer! After
 all I remember how in my youth I heard a mayor lament that writers of books
 were going too far and sought to extirpate Christianity and righteousness altogether;
 somebody had written a defense of suicide; terrible, really too terrible! - Further
 questions revealed that The Sufferings of Werther [by Goethe, 1774] were meant.

This is abstract thinking: to see nothing in the murderer except the abstract fact that he is a murderer, and to annul all other human essence in him with this simple quality.

It is quite different in refined, sentimental circles - in Leipzig.
 There they strewed and bound flowers on the wheel and on the criminal who was
 tied to it. - But this again is the opposite abstraction. The Christians may indeed
 trifle with Rosicrucianism, or rather cross-rosism, and wreathe roses around
 the cross. The cross is the gallows and wheel that have long been hallowed.
 It has lost its one-sided significance of being the instrument of dishonorable
 punishment and, on the contrary, suggests the notion of the highest pain and
 the deepest rejection together with the most joyous rapture and divine honor.
 The wheel in Leipzig, on the other hand, wreathed with violets and poppies,
 is a reconciliation &agrave; la Kotzebue, a kind of slovenly sociability between
 sentimentality and badness.

In quite a different manner I once heard a common
 old woman who worked in a hospital kill the abstraction of the murderer and
 bring him to life for honor. The severed head had been placed on the scaffold,
 and the sun was shining. How beautifully, she said, the sun of God's grace shines
 on Binder's head! - You are not worthy of having the sun shine on you, one says
 to a rascal with whom one is angry. This woman saw that the murderer's head
 was struck by the sunshine and thus was still worthy of it. She raised it from
 the punishment of the scaffold into the sunny grace of God, and instead of accomplishing
 the reconciliation with violets and sentimental vanity, saw him accepted in
 grace in the higher sun.

Old woman, your eggs are rotten! the maid says to the market
 woman. What? she replies, my eggs rotten? You may be rotten! You say that about
 my eggs? You? Did not lice eat your father on the highways? Didn't your mother
 run away with the French, and didn't your grandmother die in a public hospital?
 Let her get a whole shirt instead of that flimsy scarf; we know well where she
 got that scarf and her hats: if it were not for those officers, many wouldn't
 be decked out like that these days, and if their ladyships paid more attention
 to their households, many would be in jail right now. Let her mend the holes
 in her stockings! - In brief, she does not leave one whole thread on her. She
 thinks abstractly and subsumes the other woman - scarf, hat, shirt, etc., as well as her fingers
 and other parts of her, and her father and whole family, too - solely under the
 crime that she has found the eggs rotten. Everything about her is colored through
 and through by these rotten eggs, while those officers of which the market woman
 spoke - if, as one may seriously doubt, there is anything to that - may have got
 to see very different things.

To move from the maid to a servant, no servant is worse off
 than one who works for a man of low class and low income; and he is better off
 the nobler his master is. The common man again thinks more abstractly, he gives
 himself noble airs vis-&agrave;-vis the servant and relates himself to the other
 man merely as to a servant; he clings to this one predicate. The servant is
 best off among the French. The nobleman is familiar with his servant, the Frenchman
 is his friend. When they are alone, the servant does the talking: see Diderot's
 Jacques et son ma&icirc;tre; the master does nothing but take snuff and
 see what time it is and lets the servant take care of everything else. The nobleman
 knows that the servant is not merely a servant, but also knows the latest city
 news, the girls, and harbors good suggestions; he asks him about these matters,
 and the servant may say what he knows about these questions. With a French master,
 the servant may not only do this; he may also broach a subject, have his own
 opinions and insist on them; and when the master wants something, it is not
 done with an order but he has to argue and convince the servant of his opinion
 and add a good word to make sure that this opinion retains the upper hand.

In the army we encounter the same difference. Among the Austrians
 a soldier may be beaten, he is canaille; for whatever has the passive right
 to be beaten is canaille. Thus the common soldier is for the officer this abstractum
 of a beatable subject with whom a gentleman who has a uniform and port
 d'ep&eacute;e must trouble himself - and that could drive one to make a pact
 with the devil.

 Note by Walter Kaufman:

In the nineteenth-century edition of Hegel's Werke, this article ( Wer denkt abstrakt? ) appears in volume XVII, 400-5. Rosenkranz discusses it briefly (355 f.) and says that it shows "how much Hegel ... entered into the Berlin manner.

Glockner reprints it in his edition of the Werke in vol. XX (1930), which is entitled: Vermischte Schriften aus der Berliner Zeit. He includes it among "four feuilletons that Hegel wrote for local papers during the later years of his Berlin period. But Glockner admits: "The exact place of publication is unfortunately unknown to me."

Hoffmeister, whose critical edition of Hegel's Berliner
 Schriften: 1818-1831 (1956) is much more comprehensive than Glockner's
 (800 pages versus 550), does not include this article. In a footnote he says
 that it belongs to Hegel's "Jena period (1807/08)". This is
 an uncharacteristic slip: at the beginning of 1807 Hegel went to Bamberg, in
 1808 to N&uuml;rnberg; and in the first weeks of 1807, before he left Jena,
 he certainly lacked the time and peace of mind to write this article.

Of Glockner's "four feuilletons" Hoffmeister
 retains only one, and that is really a letter to a newspaper, protesting their
 review of a new play. Hoffmeister gives no reasons for dating this article so
 much earlier than Rosenkranz and Glockner did. Possibly, the disparaging remark
 about Kotzebue (a German playwright, 1761-1819) suggests a date before Kotzebue
 was stabbed to death by a German theology student. That the piece was written
 in Jena seems most unlikely: it is so very different from the articles - and the
 Phenomenology - that Hegel wrote during his harassed and unhappy years in that city. But Hoffmeister could be right that it was written in 1807 or 1808.

 Hegel-by-HyperText Home Page @ marxists.org